The Project Gutenberg eBook of Dimple Dallas
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Dimple Dallas
        The further fortunes of a sweet little maid

Author: Amy E Blanchard

Illustrator: Ida Waugh

Release date: February 15, 2025 [eBook #75380]

Language: English

Original publication: Philadelphia: George W. Jacobs & Company, 1900

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIMPLE DALLAS ***





                             Dimple Dallas

              The Further Fortunes of a Sweet Little Maid

                          BY AMY E. BLANCHARD

        _Author of "A Sweet Little Maid," "A Dear Little Girl,"
          "Thy Friend Dorothy," "Kittyboy's Christmas," etc._

                      _ILLUSTRATED BY IDA WAUGH_

                             PHILADELPHIA
                         GEORGE W. JACOBS & CO
                    103-105 SOUTH FIFTEENTH STREET

                          Copyright, 1900, by
                         GEORGE W. JACOBS & CO

                                  TO
                             GWENYTH WAUGH
            WELL BELOVED FOR HER OWN SAKE, AND FOR THE SAKE
                     ON THOSE WHOSE NAME SHE BEARS

                               A. E. B.




                              _CONTENTS_


                           I. THE NEW SCHOLAR

                          II. CHANGES

                         III. TROUBLE WITH DONALD

                          IV. A NEW DOLL

                           V. MORE TROUBLE

                          VI. WHERE IS BUBBLES?

                         VII. UNCLE HEATH

                        VIII. SHOPPING

                          IX. AT CHRISTMAS

                           X. A HAPPY NEW YEAR

                          XI. DON AND A PONY

                         XII. A MAY PARTY




                            _ILLUSTRATIONS_


    BUBBLES TRIED HER BEST TO COMFORT HER

    ELEANOR PROCEEDED TO OPEN THE TRUNK

    THEY HAD LUNCHEON IN THE LIBRARY

    THE TWO LITTLE GIRLS HAD GREAT TIMES PLAYING

    BUSY OVER THE CROWN FOR THE QUEEN TO WEAR




                             Dimple Dallas




                              _CHAPTER I_

                           _The New Scholar_


The schoolroom was very quiet except for the whisperings from many
rosy lips as the children studied their lessons. Presently Miss Reese
tapped the bell and immediately there was more of a commotion as sundry
small skirts switched out from between the desks and several little
girls took their places in class. Among them was one with fair hair who
turned very red when a question was put to her by the teacher. It was
Eleanor Dallas' first day in school and she was painfully shy at having
to recite before others, for she had always been taught at home, and
having no brothers and sisters, she felt that in the presence of twenty
or more other girls that it would be impossible for her to remember
how to spell _parallel_ or _separate_ or _conscience_, and she spoke so
low when Miss Reese asked her a word that she could scarcely be heard.

"A little louder, my dear," said Miss Reese; "I cannot hear you."
And then, with all the girls looking at her, and, with a growing
uncertainty as to whether impartial were spelled with a _t_ or a _c_,
she could not say anything.

A titter ran around the class and poor Eleanor was in a state of abject
misery. Miss Reese, however, said kindly, "Never mind, Eleanor, I will
excuse you from recitations this first day, and give you a little
examination after school."

"She's going to be kept in," whispered Laura Field to the girl next to
her, and the words reached Eleanor's ears. She had heard of girls being
kept in, and to think the disgrace had fallen upon her this first day.
It was almost more than she could bear, and she sat for the rest of the
period with downcast eyes to hide the tears which would keep welling up.

Recitations over, the girls flaunted out of the room with many backward
glances directed toward the place where Eleanor was sitting with
such a miserable little face that Miss Reese, looking up and seeing
the trembling lips, felt that something out of the common must be the
matter. "Come here, dear," she said. "Are you not feeling well?"

"Yes, Miss Reese," faltered Eleanor.

"I hope none of the girls have been unkind to you. The first day at
school is always a trying one. I remember well enough how I felt when
I was a little girl. Very much as you do, I fancy." She put her arm
around the child and drew her close to her side. "Now," she said, "I
will go over to-morrow's lessons with you. Your mamma has told me
something of your methods of study, and since you have been using
different books from these, it will be better for me to give you some
idea of what we are going to do. There, now, these are your nice fresh
new books. Shall I put your name in them?"

"If you please," responded Eleanor, quite interested and beginning to
forget her shyness. This being kept in wasn't so dreadful after all.

Miss Reese went over all the next day's lessons and as she closed the
last book a little negro girl appeared at the door. "Miss Dimple, yo'
ma say, what de reason yuh ain't come home?" she said.

"I was kept in," said Eleanor rather shamefacedly.

Miss Reese laughed. "Why, my child, no you were not, at least not with
the general intention that kept in means. I simply wanted to have you
stay that I might go over the lessons with you. Did you think I meant
it for punishment, you poor little girl?"

Eleanor looked up shyly. "I did think so," she answered. "One of the
girls----" She stopped short. Her Cousin Florence had told her that it
was very, very mean to tell tales about the girls, and that when she
went to school she must never do it, or else the girls would dislike
her.

Miss Reese noticed the sudden pause and with tact did not pursue the
subject. "Now run along," she said. "To-morrow I hope you will have
good recitations, and you mustn't be afraid to speak above a whisper."

True enough, the next day Eleanor was so sure of her _tions_ and her
_sions_ that she did not miss a single word, and, moreover, she made
friends with two of the nicest girls who invited her to come to their
own special corner to eat luncheon with them, and in a few days she
felt quite at her ease. She had known several of the girls before she
entered school and before long she had entirely overcome her shyness of
the others. But many of the experiences were novel, especially those
which occurred in the big schoolroom where the whole school assembled
to take part in the physical exercises, to listen to lectures or to
view certain experiments in physics. Eleanor never forgot her first
experience when the subject of electricity was before the school, and
she was invited to stand upon a board set upon four tumblers, and after
a contact with the electrical apparatus found her hair slowly rising
on end. Seeing her startled look, one of her best friends among the
larger girls, Hattie Spear, dropped on her knees and held out her arms.
Eleanor threw herself into them and at the same moment Hattie gave her
a kiss, then she gave a little scream and the girls all laughed, for
Eleanor had given her friend an electric shock.

It took Mr. Dallas some time to explain the matter to his little
daughter that evening, and she watched for the next thunderstorm
with much interest, for she wanted to show off all this knowledge to
Bubbles. "You know it's electricity that makes the lightning," she told
her.

"Law, Miss Dimple, how you know that?" returned Bubbles.

"Papa told me. Just think, Bubbles, it is the same thing that makes the
light burn in the electric lamps."

"Is dat so?" Bubbles raised her hands and appeared to be much
impressed. Then after some moments given to thought, she said,
"What you say de name of de man what makes de street lights, and de
lightnin'? Mr. Elick Cristy? Whar he live?"

Eleanor looked at her quite puzzled, and then she laughed, but she did
not offer any explanation, for at that moment her mother called her.
But after that Bubbles always spoke of Mr. Elick Cristy's lights out on
the street corner.

Eleanor's pet name at home was Dimple, but Mrs. Dallas felt that there
was danger of her little daughter's becoming altogether known by it,
and had asked Miss Reese to call her Eleanor. Dimple felt that this
was a step toward young ladyhood, and was very particular to instruct
Bubbles to call her Miss Eleanor upon every occasion. But Bubbles would
forget and upon the very first rainy day appeared at school with an
umbrella for "Miss Dimple."

"That's a funny little colored girl," said one of Eleanor's
schoolmates. "I've seen her often but I never knew that she lived at
your house."

"She has lived with us ever since I was a baby. She is quite a nice
child," returned Eleanor in a dignified little way. "Come here,
Bubbles, and put on my waterproof."

"Miss Dimple, yo' ma give me a ribbon fo' Floridy Alabamy, dis mawnin',
an' she got one fo' you too," said Bubbles in a confidential tone.

"Has she?" returned Dimple indifferently. "You may carry my books,
Bubbles. I am going to walk with Janet." Bubbles took the books and
trotted along obediently behind the two girls. Janet was a new arrival
in town and being lately entered at school Eleanor had a fellow feeling
for her.

"Do you ever play with her?" asked Janet. "And she calls you Dimple;
what does she do that for?"

"They call me that at home, and, yes, I play with her sometimes."

"Oh, do you?" said Janet looking surprised. "I believe I'll call you
Dimple," she added.

"No, please don't. Mamma doesn't want any one to, because she says when
I grow up it will sound ridiculous."

"All right, then I won't," Janet returned. "I wish you would come over
to my house this afternoon."

"Oh, no, you come to mine. We can play out in my little house in the
garden, even if it does rain."

"Have you a little playhouse?"

"Yes, one all my own. Papa had it built for me."

Janet was much impressed. "I'll come," she said. And the two little
girls parted to meet an hour later.

It was Friday afternoon, and there were no lessons to be studied, and
therefore Eleanor counted on having a fine time. "Mamma," she said, as
she entered the house, "I have a new friend, at least I haven't known
her very long and she has never been to see me, but she is coming this
afternoon. Her name is Janet Forrester. She lives in that yellow house
on Main Street, you know, the one by the church."

"Yes, I know."

"She hasn't been living in town very long, and that's why she doesn't
know many people. Do you know her mother?"

"Only slightly. I have called upon her. I hope Janet is a good little
girl, and one that is proper for you to associate with."

"Oh yes, she is. She wears lovely clothes, and her father keeps a
carriage."

Mrs. Dallas smiled. "I don't think we can judge by either of those
things. You would better play in your own little house, for your papa
has come home feeling far from well, and I should like to keep the
house quiet."

Eleanor looked distressed. "Oh, mamma, is he very ill? Will he have to
have a doctor?"

"He will see Doctor Sullivan, but I hope he is not very ill. When your
little friend has gone, come and tell me about your afternoon together,
but try not to disturb me while I am with papa."

Eleanor promised, and then went down to her playhouse in the garden. It
was a pretty place, and the little girl was justly proud of it. She
spent much time there, and here she kept her toys, her favorite books
and dolls, and here she most frequently entertained her little friends.

It was not long before Bubbles showed Janet into the room. Bubbles,
too, was very proud of Miss Dimple's playhouse, and she had quite a
grand air as she ushered this new acquaintance into the presence of the
owner of the house, saying: "Company, Miss Dimple."

Janet looked around with a critical air, and was immediately seized
with a feeling of envy. "It's a right nice little house," she said
loftily, "but it isn't as big as the one I had at home in Hartford; and
I had real lace curtains to my windows, and Turkey rugs on the floor.
Oh, there's only one room, isn't there? My house had two. Do you keep
your horse and carriage in that stable, I see out there?"

"No," Eleanor was obliged to confess. "We haven't any horse and
carriage. We keep a cow and chickens, though."

"I had a pony and a little cart of my own," said Janet grandly. "How
many dolls have you?"

"Six, I think."

"I have twenty. You're not going to let that nigger girl stay in here
with us, are you?"

"Why, yes. She often used to play with my Cousin Florence and me."

"My mother doesn't let me play with servants," said Janet with a little
haughty air.

Bubbles looked much crestfallen, but immediately retired when Eleanor
said: "You needn't stay, Bubbles."

"Now, what shall we play?" said Eleanor, left alone with her guest and
intent upon pleasing her.

"We'll pretend we are countesses or duchesses or something. No I choose
to be a duchess, and you can be a countess. I'm company and I must be
the finest lady. Duchesses are more important than countesses."

Eleanor didn't think this was very polite, but she yielded, and,
furthermore, gave up her best doll to her guest. "My best doll is
bigger than this," Janet remarked, "and she has a real gold chain to
wear around her neck. Haven't you more than one silk dress for yours?
All my dolls' dresses are silk. I think a duchess's child ought to be
dressed in silk. I will have to pretend her clothes are much finer than
they really are."

They played quite happily for a time, although Eleanor did not quite
like the giving up of all her choicest things to her visitor, but she
had been taught that her guests must always have the best of everything
and she made no objections. It was toward the latter part of the
afternoon that Janet suddenly exclaimed: "Oh, where is my pearl ring?
It's gone."

"Really?" said Eleanor.

"Yes, I believe that servant girl, you call Bubbles, has stolen it."

"Oh, no, she couldn't have done that," Eleanor protested, quite
shocked. "Not if you had it on when you came in here, and besides she
wouldn't do such a thing."

"I don't know about that; anyhow, I had it on when I left home."

"Perhaps you dropped it somewhere. Let's look for it; you see it has
stopped raining." But no amount of searching revealed the ring, and
Janet repeated her charges against Bubbles.

"I'm just going to hunt her up, and tell her she's got it, and I'll
make her give it back to me," she said.

"Oh, no, please," begged Eleanor; "I know she wouldn't take it."

"Just tell me this then. Has she never taken anything in all her life?"

Eleanor hesitated. Once Bubbles had possessed herself of some scraps
which she coveted for doll clothes, but her offence had never been
repeated, and Mrs. Dallas trusted her implicitly. "I know she hasn't
taken it," repeated Eleanor, much distressed.

"You're just trying to shield her," said Janet. "I'm going home and get
my father to send a police officer after her; that's what I'm going to
do." And she flounced out leaving Eleanor in tears. Such a dreadful
threat and poor Bubbles; perhaps she would have to go to prison.
Eleanor's soft little heart was wrung at the thought, and she rushed up
to the house to find her mother and pour the doleful tale in her ears.




                             _CHAPTER II_

                               _Changes_


Mrs. Dallas greeted Eleanor's tempestuous entrance with, "Softly, dear,
you know papa is not well." Eleanor lowered her excited tones and
poured forth her grievance, Mrs. Dallas listening quietly. At the close
of the recital she said: "I am sorry, my child, that it has happened,
and from what you tell me, I do not think Janet will prove to be just
the kind of a friend you would prefer. I think the best plan will be
for me to send a note to Mrs. Forrester and tell her that we will use
every means to find the ring, and ask her to let us know if it is
discovered at her own home."

"Please don't let Bubbles take the note."

"No, I will not. I am going to send a prescription to the drug store,
and the note can be taken at the same time, but if Bubbles does not
take it, I think you will have to."

"O, mamma, I don't want to. Can't Sylvy go?"

"I cannot spare her."

Eleanor was silent for a moment. She did not want to subject Bubbles to
a possible wordy attack from Janet, and yet she dreaded seeing her late
companion again. But her loyalty to Bubbles at last overcame all other
feeling, and she said: "I don't have to go in, do I, mamma? I can leave
the note at the door?"

"Yes, that will be quite sufficient."

"Then I will go instead of Bubbles."

Her mother smiled. "I thought you would decide it so. I can generally
be sure of my little daughter's good heart."

"You don't believe Bubbles took the ring, do you, mamma?"

"No, I think Janet has probably dropped it somewhere."

Eleanor started off on her errand, and after going to the drug store,
she went on to deliver the note, and reached the gate just in time to
meet Mrs. Forrester coming out with Janet. The two little girls looked
at each other in rather an embarrassed way. It was not an agreeable
meeting for either of them.

"This is one of your little school friends, isn't it, Janet?" Mrs.
Forrester asked. "Oh, you have a note for me? Wait a minute."

Eleanor would rather have made her escape at once, but she obediently
remained while Mrs. Forrester read the note. "Why, I don't know
anything about this," said the lady. "What does your mamma mean? What
ring is it she mentions?"

"Janet lost a pearl ring at our house," Eleanor answered.

"Did she? I didn't know she had one," said Mrs. Forrester laughing.
"That is one of your fairy tales, Janet."

"I did have a pearl ring, and that nigger girl stole it," Janet
returned.

Eleanor flushed up. "She means Bubbles, and I know she didn't steal it."

"You are a silly little creature, Janet," said Mrs. Forrester airily.
"Where did you get your valuable ring?"

"I bought it for five cents."

Mrs. Forrester laughed again. "So precious it must have been. Here,
take this five cents and go buy another, and that will end the matter."

"I don't want another, I want that one."

"You spoiled child, I don't believe you did lose it, you just wanted
me to give you the nickel." She turned to Eleanor. "Don't pay any more
attention to it, my child," she said. "It is really of no consequence."

"Her name is Dimple," broke in Janet.

"My name is Eleanor," maintained the other, sturdily.

"It's of no consequence, Dimple," Mrs. Forrester said. "You can tell
your mother that Janet has her ring."

"But she hasn't," said Eleanor in surprise.

"She will have as soon as we can go to the shop and get it."

This sort of reasoning was quite new to Eleanor, and she stood stock
still puzzling over it. While she stood thus a housemaid came out
with something in her hand. "You left this in the sitting-room on
the windowsill," she said to Janet, holding out a little trumpery
ring. Janet shot one look at Eleanor, and Eleanor with a dignified
"Good-evening," turned away thoroughly disgusted with this new
acquaintance, and it is safe to say that Bubbles was immediately
informed of the finding of the ring, and was, moreover, told that
Eleanor did not intend to play with Janet any more, a fact which
pleased Bubbles mightily.

The next few days, however, were very anxious ones for Mrs. Dallas, for
her husband was found to have a severe attack of rheumatic fever, and
even after he was pronounced better, his recovery was so slow that at
last the doctor said he must go away to some famous springs in the far
west. The day after this was decided upon, Mrs. Dallas called Eleanor
to her. "My little girl," she said, "I am going to ask you to do a very
hard thing for papa and me."

Eleanor looked up with wide open blue eyes. "Of course I'll do it,
mamma."

"Wait, dear, till you know what it is. You know the doctor says papa
must go away; now, I do not feel as if he were well enough to travel
that distance alone, besides, in every way it would be better for me to
go with him. He is greatly depressed, and if he were to go off alone he
would mope and be homesick, and the trip would not do him the good that
it ought to. Now, dear, it will be a very expensive journey and it
will not be possible for us to take our little daughter, and besides,
now that she is fairly started in school we do not want her to be
interrupted, so dear----"

"Oh mamma!" came with piteous entreaty.

Mrs. Dallas put her arm around the child and drew her close to her.
"Darling, you do not know how hard it is going to be for me to leave
you."

Eleanor winked away her tears. "Oh mamma, why can't I go to Aunt
Eleanor's and go to school with Florence?"

"Because several of your Aunt Eleanor's children have the
whooping-cough. Florence was the last to succumb, so a letter from Aunt
Eleanor to-day told me, and you know your Uncle Heath and Aunt Dora
have gone to California to look after some business there that must be
settled up, and Rock will be sent to boarding-school, so you cannot go
to them."

"And shall you leave me here all alone?"

"No, indeed; papa and I have talked it over and we have decided to ask
Cousin Ellen Murdoch to come here with her family, and remain while we
are gone."

"She is the one whose husband died a little while ago and left her
with--how many children?"

"Four. Yes, she is the one."

"But, mamma----"

"Well, dear."

"I thought--I didn't know that you were very fond of her."

Mrs. Dallas smiled. "Perhaps I am not so fond of her as I am of some
persons."

"Then why do you let her come to your house?"

"Because she needs a change of scene, and it would be a good thing for
her if she could come here till her affairs are straightened out. It
is not only toward those we like that we should show consideration. We
ought not to be so selfish as to entertain only those persons who are
agreeable to us. If a person needs our sympathy we ought to offer it in
whatever way we can."

"Do you think I ought to entertain Janet?"

"No," answered Mrs. Dallas smiling, "I don't think she needs your
consideration; if she were in trouble and you could do her a kindness I
think you should do it. Some day you may have an opportunity of doing
some such thing, and then I hope you will not hesitate to do it."

"Mamma."

"Well, dear?"

"Was Cousin Ellen ever hateful to you?"

"You mustn't ask such searching questions, dear child. All you have to
do is to make it as pleasant as possible for her while she is here. She
has had much trouble and sorrow, but I know she will take excellent
care of you, and the rest we must not think about. Sylvy and Bubbles
will be here and you will be in your own home."

"But, mamma, I shall miss you so."

"And I shall miss you, my pet." They hugged each other, but when
Eleanor felt tears splash down from other eyes than her own she
squeezed her mother tighter and said: "Please don't cry, mamma, I will
be very good, I will so."

"Thank you for the promise, dear. If papa sees you are bright and
cheerful about our going it will make him feel easier, and so will help
him to get well the sooner. See what a baby your mamma is. I must not
go before papa with such teary eyes."

"With blue eyes trimmed with red," said Eleanor laughing. "Let me go
tell him that I don't mind so very, very much, and--oh mamma, is there
a baby?"

"You mean among Cousin Ellen's children? Yes, there is a little girl
about a year and a half old."

"I shall like that. I love babies." And with this Eleanor left the room
to go to her father.

The next few days were full of excitement, for the packing and
arranging required Mrs. Dallas' constant attention. Mrs. Murdoch was
not to arrive till the evening of the day which saw Mr. and Mrs. Dallas
take their departure. Eleanor kept up bravely till she saw the carriage
turn the corner and then she sobbed unrestrainedly. It was not only
that it wrung her heart to see her father come hobbling on crutches out
of the house, but he looked so pale and thin that the thought of being
separated from him and from her mother was more than she could bear.
Never before did she remember having her mother parted from her for any
length of time, certainly a week, at the furthest, was the very longest
time that they had ever been away from each other.

Bubbles tried her best to comfort her. "Ne' mind, Miss Dimple," she
said. "Yo' pa goin' off on crutches, but terreckly he comin' back
'thout 'em. Yuh don' want him go hippy-hop all he lifetime."

[Illustration: "BUBBLES TRIED HER BEST TO COMFORT HER"]

"No," sobbed Eleanor, "of course I don't, but I do wish he hadn't that
horrid rheumatism, and I want my mamma, I do, I do. It will be so long
before I see her again. I wish I could go, oh, I wish I could go!" she
sobbed afresh.

Bubbles clasped her knees entreatingly, the tears rolling down her own
cheeks in sympathy. "Miss Dimple, ef yuh cries that-a-way, I git so
miserble I won't know what to do," she said.

"I'm miserable," said Eleanor. "I wish Florence didn't have the
whooping-cough, then I could go to Aunt Eleanor's." Then suddenly she
thought of Rock Hardy, who this year was at boarding-school. That must
be worse than being left in one's own home, and she began thinking so
hard about him that the tears ceased to flow, and, although it was a
very mournful little face which was seen about the house for the next
hour, no more tears were shed that afternoon.

Mrs. Dallas had suggested that Eleanor should go with Bubbles to the
train to meet her relatives, and about five o'clock they started down
to the railroad station. "I don't like to see the cars," said Eleanor;
"they make me think of mamma and papa; they are traveling on and on,
and every minute takes them further away." But at this moment the train
came in sight and in watching for the newcomers Eleanor for the moment,
forgot her griefs.

"There they are, Bubbles," she cried. "I am sure that lady in black
is Cousin Ellen, and there are the two little girls and the boy.
Where is the baby, I wonder. Oh, the conductor is lifting her down.
She can walk, you see, for he has set her down on the platform." She
went forward rather timidly, saying, "I am Eleanor Dallas, and this
is Bubbles. You are Cousin Ellen, aren't you? Shall Bubbles carry the
baby?"

Mrs. Murdoch assented. "I shall be glad if some one will take charge of
her. I am tired to death. Here, Donald, take these checks and find an
expressman to take the trunks. Eleanor will show you where to go. Come,
Olive, come, Jessie, we can go on."

Thrust thus suddenly into the company of a strange boy, Eleanor had
nothing to say for some minutes. She was not used to boys, and, as a
rule, avoided them. The one before her was not specially attractive,
she thought, but after a while she found her voice and said: "Here is
the place."

Donald threw down the checks. "Where are the trunks to go? What is your
number?" he asked Eleanor curtly.

She told him and when the address was given they went on, Donald
striding along with his hands in his pockets and vouchsafing no reply
to Eleanor's "we go this way."

"Do we have to walk? Aren't there any electric cars?" he asked when
they had turned the first corner.

"Yes, but it isn't very far, and the cars don't go by our house,"
Eleanor told him.

"'Tisn't much of a place, is it?"

"It isn't a real big city, of course. Did you think it was?"

"No, but you needn't be so smart."

Eleanor wondered wherein she had shown her special smartness, and made
up her mind, then and there, that this boy was not going to be any
company for her. He was about nine years old, but assumed the manner of
a boy older. The two girls seemed to be about six and eleven.

Eleanor was glad when they reached home; the others had already
arrived. It gave the child a pang to see Mrs. Murdoch established in
her mother's room, although it seemed perfectly proper that the girls
should occupy the guest chamber. A little room back of it was set apart
for Donald.

"Say, mamma, I don't like that room," he said on seeing it. "I want one
next to you. Isn't there one there?"

"Yes, but it is Eleanor's room."

"Well, I don't care. I always have a room next to you. Her mother isn't
here and she won't care."

"You will be next to your sisters," said Mrs. Murdoch.

"I don't want to be next to a pair of giggling girls. I want to be next
to you, so I can call you if I have earache or anything."

Mrs. Murdoch looked uncertainly at Eleanor. "Perhaps Eleanor would just
as lief be next the girls," she said.

"Mamma said I was to keep my own room," returned Eleanor with rising
color. "It has always been my room since I had one."

"Oh, very well," said Mrs. Murdoch. "We'll see about it after a while,
Donald." But Donald's black looks did not add to Eleanor's serenity,
and she felt that every mouthful of supper would choke her although
Sylvy had prepared a specially appetizing meal.




                             _CHAPTER III_

                         _Trouble With Donald_


Eleanor soon found that her favorite among the Murdoch children would
prove to be Jessie. Olive, the eldest girl, was not a very pleasant
child, being "touchy," critical, prim, and absorbed in herself. She was
fond of reading, but did not enter very heartily into the plays which
entertained Eleanor and Jessie. Mrs. Murdoch was a careful housekeeper,
and also a careful mother but a very indulgent one, and although she
attended most conscientiously to all of Eleanor's creature comforts she
did not give her any of the tenderness which she lavished upon her own
children, and very soon Eleanor came to feel like an outsider in her
own home.

Her refusal to give up her room to Donald won her that spoiled
youngster's ill-will, and he never lost an opportunity of teasing her,
to Bubbles' great distress, so that finally there was open warfare
between the boy and the little colored girl.

To Bubbles was given the care of the little baby, Alma, and Eleanor
was seldom allowed to have any of her old-time plays with the little
nursemaid. "You have Jessie and Olive now to play with," her Cousin
Ellen told her, "and I can find other things for Barbara to do." Cousin
Ellen was very precise in some matters and she considered the name
which Eleanor in her baby days had bestowed upon the small negro girl
as a ridiculous one, she therefore called her Barbara. At first Bubbles
declined to respond to this, but she soon found that she must. Sylvy
took her leave shortly after Mrs. Murdoch's arrival, declaring that she
would not come back till Mrs. Dallas returned. "I don't like nobody
al'ays fussin' roun' my kitchen," she said, "an' I wants to res' up,
anyway."

Therefore another woman was installed in Sylvy's place and Eleanor was
never allowed to go into the kitchen to make patty-cakes or to help
Bubbles in order that she might the sooner get through her work and
come out to play with her beloved Miss Dimple.

Nevertheless, Bubbles was permitted to take little Alma down to the
playhouse, on occasions, and many a good time Eleanor promised herself
there, for this was specially her own, and if she wanted a quiet place
of retreat she could always go there.

But one Saturday morning when she was skipping down to her little
house, she was surprised to see Donald busily engaged in carrying her
toys out on the small porch, and depositing them there. She stood still
in amazement, and then cried out sharply, "What are you doing, Donald?
Let my things alone."

"I'm not hurting your old things," Donald returned. "I'm putting them
down carefully enough, silly dolls and trash as they are."

"They are not trash, and I'll thank you to put them back again."

"I'm not going to do anything of the kind; I'm going to have this for
my house while I'm here."

"Where did you get the key?"

"From where it belongs, on the nail behind the dining-room door."

Eleanor was aghast, then, with a lump in her throat, which threatened
every moment to be followed by a flood of tears from her eyes, she ran
back to the house, and hunted up Mrs. Murdoch. "Oh, Cousin Ellen," she
cried in a tumult, "Donald is taking all my toys out of my playhouse.
Please, won't you make him stop?"

Mrs. Murdoch put down her piece of sewing very deliberately. "Donald
asked me if he could have the use of the playhouse," she said. "I
never allow him to play in the street, and his room is so small that
he cannot enjoy playing there, and there is no room that can be spared
for a play room in the house, besides, if there were it would be much
better to let him play out there in the garden where he can make all
the noise he chooses."

"But," said Eleanor, the tears beginning to rise, "that is my
owny-doney house. Papa had it built e'spressly for me. It's my own, my
very own, and I don't want Donald to have it. I should think he could
play in the garden and the wood-shed and in such places as the other
boys in the town do."

Here spoke up Olive. "I think you are very selfish. Don't you, mamma? I
always give up to Donald when mamma asks me to, don't I, mamma?"

"I don't care; he is your brother and that is different," replied
Eleanor.

"All the more that he is not your brother," returned Olive. "I don't
think you are a bit generous about your things when Donald is a
stranger here, too, and he doesn't know near so many people as you do.
Mamma said that if he got acquainted with one or two nice boys that she
would allow him to have them here to play if they could play in the
playhouse."

Poor Eleanor looked the picture of distress. To be accused of
selfishness and to be robbed of her dearly loved place of refuge, that
was too much to stand, and she turned from the room without a word,
scarcely hearing Mrs. Murdoch's words: "You can have Barbara, for a
little while to help you move your toys. Olive will be kind enough to
give a portion of her time to the baby, I am sure. Go, Olive, and tell
Barbara to help Miss Eleanor to carry in her things. Your room will be
quite large enough to hold them, Eleanor."

By this time Eleanor had fled to the garret and there Bubbles found
her, after some searching, crying as if her heart would break. "He
stole my key, Bubbles, he did, and he's moving everything out of my
dear house, and----Oh, I wish mamma would come home. Nobody loves me
here. I want my own mamma." Bubbles was the picture of distress, she
possessed herself of one of Eleanor's hands; patting and stroking it,
she begged the unhappy child not to cry, comforting her as best she
could, so that after a while Eleanor, with a great sigh, stopped her
sobbing and said: "I suppose I am very selfish, for mamma gave up her
house to Cousin Ellen, and I ought to give up mine to Donald. Come,
Bubbles, let's move the things, but I hate Donald; I just can't bear
him."

They proceeded to the garden where Donald was still busy setting dolls
and dishes outside the little house. Without a word Eleanor and Bubbles
began picking up the things to carry them to the house. "You can just
leave the books and pictures," said Donald, condescendingly. "I don't
mind having them there. Most of the books are girl books, but some of
them, those fairy tales and things like that, I can read."

"I shall not leave one single thing," said Eleanor shortly.

"You're a mean, selfish girl," retorted Donald, and catching sight of
her swollen cheeks and red eyelids, he added: "Cry-baby, cry-baby, had
to give up your house whether you wanted to or not, didn't you?"

"No, I didn't," returned Eleanor fiercely. "I gave it up because my
mother was kind enough to give up her house to your mother when she
didn't have anywhere else to go, and I am doing the same, but I wish my
Cousin Rock were here to fight you. I'd fight you myself if I were a
boy, and I wish my father would whip you till you couldn't see."

In a transport of rage Donald picked up one of Eleanor's dolls and
hurled it to the ground, and then sprang at Eleanor. But Bubbles
interfered between them and received the blow; then she caught the boy
by the shoulders and shook him with all her might, and being a strong
little creature, she managed to throw him down and began to pound him
while he shouted lustily: "Mamma! Olive! Come quick! They're murdering
me!"

His yells brought Mrs. Murdoch in great excitement. "Eleanor! Barbara!
Stop!" she said in stern tones. "My poor boy, what are they doing to
you?"

"They set upon me just because I wanted the house to play in," said
Donald, scrambling to his feet, more dusty than hurt.

"Oh," cried Eleanor, "it wasn't that at all, it was because you broke
my doll and tried to strike me."

"No, it wasn't, mamma," protested Donald, "they were just mad, and I
didn't break the doll on purpose; it slipped out of my hand. Why didn't
Eleanor come and take out her old things herself? Here I was trying to
help her, and that's all the thanks I get."

Such a statement of the case amazed Eleanor, but no matter how she
tried to protest, Donald was ready with his excuses, and to his tale
alone would his mother listen, so that Eleanor and Bubbles were marched
back to the house in disgrace, Mrs. Murdoch declaring that she would
not have such a desperate character as Bubbles in the house and that
she must be sent away. "I cannot imagine how Cousin Florence could keep
such a creature, a perfect savage," said Mrs. Murdoch, "and as for you,
Eleanor, you are a very bad example to my children: ill-tempered,
untruthful, selfish; I am almost tempted to write to your mother and
tell her that I will give up the house altogether, and go back to the
city, for even poor rooms would be better than a spot where my children
are in danger. I cannot stand such scenes. Perhaps, however, if we can
remove the evil influence of that colored girl we can get along. I will
see at once about her going."

At this Bubbles burst into loud weeping, and implored Mrs. Murdoch not
to send her away, reiterating that she was only standing up for Miss
Dimple, and that no boy had any right to hit a girl; to all of which
Mrs. Murdoch was deaf, and both Bubbles and Eleanor were sent to their
respective rooms in a very desperate state of mind.

From her window Eleanor could see her little house bereft of her toys.
These lay on the ground outside, and Eleanor wondered whether they
would still be allowed to remain there in case of rain. She stood
looking wistfully out when she heard a queer noise from the garret
window above, and leaning out with eyes directed to the window, she
saw Bubbles making mysterious signs.

Eleanor hesitated for a moment, and then stole into the entry and up
the stairs to the garret. "What are you doing up here, Bubbles?" she
asked in a whisper.

"I jus' a-tryin' to git a-holt o' yuh, Miss Dimple. I gwine run away."

"Oh, Bubbles, please don't."

"Yass, m', I is. I ain't gwine let nobody boss me an' call me
story-teller an' all kin' o' names."

"Oh, but Bubbles, where will you go?"

"I gwine to Sylvy. She let me come. She res'n up, yuh knows. She at her
father's house in de country."

"But that is, oh, ever so far?"

"Yass, miss."

"Do you know the way there?"

"No, m', but the butterman, he do. Sylvy live jes' noways fum his
house, an' when he come I gwine ax him will he tek me."

"Oh, Bubbles, and I will be left all alone."

Bubbles looked distressed. "She gwine sen' me off, anyway."

"I'll beg her not to. She has no right to do it."

"Dat don' do no good. She kaint see nothin' 'cepin' them childern o'
hern, an' ef dey lies den it all right, an' ef we speaks truff we ain't
all right."

"I wish I could go, too," said Eleanor mournfully. But just then came a
voice. "Eleanor, where are you? I forbade your leaving your room."

"You jes' sass her," said Bubbles. "Ef she believe I'm bad, I'm gwine
be bad."

And Eleanor answered flippantly, "I'm up here, Cousin Ellen."

"Come down."

"Tell her yuh won't," urged Bubbles.

Eleanor hesitated. "What do you want me for?" she compromised by saying.

"Come down, and I will tell you."

"You are not my mother, I don't have to come," encouraged by Bubbles,
she said.

"You are a very bad, impertinent child. Come at once. I want you to go
and bring in those toys that are lying out on the ground cluttering up
the place."

"I'll do that," said Eleanor, turning to Bubbles. "I'll be there
directly," she called to Mrs. Murdoch. "Tell me before we go, Bubbles,
when are you going to Sylvy? I won't tell."

"Wednesday, when de butterman comes. I'll sneak out an' tek my bun'le
an' git in de wagon."

"He comes in the morning when I am at school, doesn't he?"

"Yass, miss."

"All right, I reckon you'd better do that. I am sorry, but oh, Bubbles,
I shall miss you."

Bubbles' fists went up to her eyes and she sat sniffling as Eleanor
departed.

The latter went immediately to the garden, taking no notice of Donald,
except to make a face at him as she began removing her toys. He
answered with a mocking "Cry-baby!" and Eleanor longed with helpless
rage to do something to punish him, but she could only toil back and
forth from the big house to the little one, carrying her toys, her
books, her pictures. The broken doll she took up tenderly looking down
upon it with sorrowful eyes. "You were such a pretty little thing," she
whispered, "and I did love you so much. Oh, that wicked boy! I'd like
to see how he would feel if some big giant were to dash his brains out
on the ground; you poor dear little thing. You were such a nice size to
play with, and I could do all sorts of things with you that I can't do
with my big dolls."

She was very tired when the last one of her possessions was removed,
but she called Jessie and told her that she meant to bury her dear
Florence, and Jessie cheerfully acquiesced when asked to attend the
funeral. So Florence was buried under a lilac bush, and then Eleanor
dragged her tired little legs into the house, feeling as if the clouds
were gathering thick and fast over her usually sunny sky.

But when she went up to her room for the last time that evening she
found on her table two letters, and both of them brought comfort. One
was from her mother. It was full of words of love and bade Eleanor be a
good girl and give her cousin no trouble. Her papa was very tired after
his journey, but hoped he would begin to improve as soon as he was
rested.

The other letter was from Rock Hardy, and among other things it said:
"Boarding-school isn't much like home, and I'm having a pretty tough
time, but I'm only telling this to you, for I wouldn't be so mean as
to bother mamma about it. I guess I can stand it if the other fellows
can." And these words set Eleanor thinking.




                             _CHAPTER IV_

                             _A New Doll_


Mrs. Murdoch was very cool to Eleanor after this, and Olive followed
suit, while Donald did everything in his power to annoy his cousin.
Jessie, however, was too sweet-tempered to make herself disagreeable,
and little Alma was too much of a baby to be influenced against any one
who was always kind to her and ready to amuse her. Mrs. Murdoch kept
Bubbles strictly under her eye, and would not allow her to take Alma
out of her sight, a fact which Eleanor resented more than Bubbles did.
"As if Bubbles would be cruel to a little baby," she said to Jessie.

"But you know she beat Don dreadfully," Jessie replied.

"She didn't hurt him hardly one bit, and besides, he was going to
strike me."

"Well, you know he didn't strike you," returned Jessie, and Eleanor
felt helpless to argue the point.

Rock's letter had cheered her and strengthened her. If Rock would not
tell his mother that he was having a hard time, neither would she tell
her mother about her worries, for she was sure that her dearest mamma
had more to trouble her than had Mrs. Heath, Dallas Rock's mother, and
the child bore Olive's snubs and Mrs. Murdoch's cold looks with open
defiance, but she would not tell any one but Rock; to him she wrote
quite a long letter.

"It is so dreadful here now," she wrote. "My little house in the yard
is all full of all sorts of stuff, and it is oh, so dirty, for the boys
that Don brings in there do just as they please. Cousin Ellen is very
partikular about mamma's house, but she don't care what comes of mine.
I'm not going to worry mamma, Rock, but I wish you and Florence were
here instead of Don and Olive. Jessie is a right nice little girl but
she is a good deal littler than I am." These and other things Eleanor
wrote to Rock and he answered in kind, so that Eleanor felt that they
were comrades in misery as they had been comrades in pleasure the
summer before.

It was the day before the butterman made his appearance, that an
express package, addressed to Miss Eleanor Dallas, was left at the
door. As it happened Eleanor was in her room when Bubbles came running
upstairs saying: "Somepin fo' yuh! Somepin fo' yuh! Miss Dimple. Ain't
I glad!"

With eager fingers Eleanor undid the string, uncovered the box and very
carefully lifted the soft paper snugly packed around the prettiest
little doll just about the size of the one which Donald had so wantonly
destroyed. The child's little scream of delight brought Olive and
Jessie from the next room, and they were soon all examining this new
arrival. The doll wore a pretty traveling dress of grey with hat to
match and grey suede shoes. Pinned to her frock was a note which read:

    "DEAR DIMPLE:

    "I am sending you a little friend of mine who, I hope, will be able
    to comfort you while your mamma is away. Her name is Ada and she is
    ready to be loved very much. I should like to have her taught from
    the books which you will find in her trunk, and I hope you will
    have no trouble in teaching her to be obedient and attentive.

                                                      "Your very loving
                                                           "AUNT DORA."

The note was type-written and was very easy to read.

"Oh, my dear lovely child!" cried Eleanor. "I am so glad you have come.
But where is the trunk, Bubbles?"

"Law! I nuver brought it up; I thought hit were fo' somebody e's,"
and Bubbles skurried downstairs as fast as her legs could take her,
coming back in a moment with the trunk in her arms. Eleanor proceeded
immediately to open it and found it filled with a most complete little
wardrobe: two school dresses, a handsome suit for extra occasions,
a fine white frock for parties. Then there were stockings, tiny
handkerchiefs, all manner of under-clothing, a set of furs, ribbons,
a little hood trimmed with fur, a cunning hat in a small bandbox, and
at the very bottom of the trunk were found a slate and several funny
little books. Even Olive could not resist many ohs and ahs as one after
another of the dainty garments appeared. Aunt Dora had evidently made
everything with her own hands and the tiny hems, the neat little seams,
so excited the children's admiration that Jessie begged to take them to
her mother to look at.

[Illustration: "ELEANOR PROCEEDED TO OPEN THE TRUNK"]

Mrs. Murdoch's remark was: "They are very nice, Jessie, but I wish
Eleanor were more worthy of such kindness."

Eleanor, hearing the words, retreated to the door of her own room;
standing there she retorted: "I am worth Aunt Dora's kindness as much
as you are worth my mamma's. She wouldn't treat one of your children
the way you do me, and I think when she lets you have her nice house to
live in that you might be a little more polite to me."

"Such a want of fine feeling," sighed Mrs. Murdoch. "When you show a
sweet and amiable spirit, Eleanor, I shall be ready to give you more
affection, but you cannot expect it from those whom you twit and taunt
because of their misfortunes."

"My mamma has a trouble, too," returned Eleanor, "and you are making a
lot for me. I wish I had never seen you."

"Such a dreadfully spoiled child," sighed Mrs. Murdoch. "I would rather
you did not come into my room, Eleanor, since you only stir up strife,
and seem to delight in making impertinent speeches."

"You just keep out of my mother's room," said Olive, looking defiantly
at Eleanor.

With a little choking sob, Eleanor turned and went away, saying only:
"It's my mamma's room; my own mamma's room, and I was never turned out
of it before."

"Never mind her, Olive," she heard Mrs. Murdoch say. "She is a spoiled,
badly-managed child, and you must try to set her a good example. I am
grieved to find that Florence is so indulgent and injudicious a mother."

Eleanor hearing, turned in a perfect storm of tears goaded beyond
endurance to say, "You shall not say such things about my mother.
She is the dearest and best in the world, and I'd like to know where
anybody could find such a hateful, spoiled, wicked, wicked child as
Donald. And as for Olive, she is a horrid little sneak. I saw her steal
cake from the pantry and she told you that Bubbles did it. I don't tell
stories and I don't take things without leave."

"Oh, mamma, I didn't," said Olive turning very red, but denying
Eleanor's charge with emphasis.

"Don't add falsehood to your other sins, Eleanor," said Mrs. Murdoch.
"Go to your room. Indeed, I wish to do my duty by you, but I cannot
have you shield that favorite of yours by telling falsehoods about my
children."

Olive whispered something to her, and she nodded in reply while Eleanor
walked from the room and threw herself sobbing into Bubbles' arms. "Oh,
Bubbles, Bubbles," she cried, "they say I tell stories and it is they
who do, and they call me selfish and wicked when it is they who are.
Oh, what shall I do?"

"Ne'm mind, Miss Dimple," said Bubbles, soothingly. "'Tain't goneter
las' fo'ever, an' yuh jes' go 'long an' don' min' what Miss Murder
say." Then she whispered: "Don' min' 'bout me. She ain't a goin' to
fin' no place fo' me, an' yuh know I is goin' to Sylvy. Mebbe she won't
be so cross when I'm gone. Come, now, le's play with yo' new dolly. My,
ain't she pretty with them big eyes an' them rosy cheeks?"

"She is lovely," returned Eleanor, drying her eyes, "and I shall just
love her, but I wish I could run away with you, Bubbles."

"Sh!" said Bubbles, for just then Olive entered and said in a prim
way: "Mamma says you are not to stay in here with Eleanor, Barbara.
She says you are to go down and set the table for tea, and you are
not to stay in Eleanor's room nor even come in here without express
permission."

Bubbles arose and obediently went below stairs, but she muttered much
to herself and racked her brain for some way in which she could avenge
the trials of her beloved Miss Dimple, who, meanwhile was trying to
comfort herself with her new doll. A letter from her mother that day
had said that Mr. Dallas was not quite so well but that Eleanor was not
to worry, for she hoped to have better news the next time she wrote,
and she was glad to hear that her little daughter was getting along
well at school and that she was well. She must try to be kind and
obedient and helpful to her Cousin Ellen.

"I won't, I won't, I won't," whispered Eleanor to herself. "I can't
be. She is too hateful to me. I wish I had never seen her and I wish I
could stay out of the house all the time." And indeed this is what she
tried to do, starting early for school, and trying to spend as much of
the afternoon as possible with some of her schoolmates. Olive had made
friends with Janet Forrester, and Jessie had found a playmate nearer
her own age, so Eleanor was free to select her own friends. Upon one
occasion there came a clash upon this very subject, for Mrs. Murdoch
insisted that Eleanor should go to Janet Forrester's to spend the
afternoon. "I feel myself responsible for you, Eleanor," she said, "and
I should like to know that you are somewhere with Olive that I may be
able to account for you."

"Mamma doesn't like me to play with Janet," Eleanor blurted out.

"Why not?"

Eleanor hung her head. She did not like to tell tales, in school or
out, but Olive spoke up: "I know, mamma; it's because Barbara stole a
ring from Janet and she and Eleanor quarreled about it."

"Oh, what a story," cried Eleanor. "She didn't steal it, any such a
thing. Janet said she did just to get Bubbles into trouble and she
found the ring afterward at her own house. So there."

Mrs. Murdoch and Olive exchanged glances and Mrs. Murdoch lifted her
eyebrows slightly, in a way that Eleanor much disliked.

"That's what Janet told me, anyhow, mamma," said Olive meaningly.

"There are always two sides to a question," said Mrs. Murdoch, "but if
you are sure, Eleanor, that your mamma does not like you to play with
Janet you needn't go. Mrs. Forrester has doubtless the same objection
on her side."

Eleanor looked at her with blazing eyes; then stamping her foot she
cried: "I wish you'd just write to mamma and ask her. She will tell you
the truth, anyhow, if you don't believe me. I never tell stories. I
never do such things. You can ask mamma." And she turned away.

This was on Wednesday before school, and on her return home she found
Mrs. Murdoch in quite a perturbed state. "Eleanor," she said, "have
you seen anything of Barbara? She hasn't been seen since about eleven
o'clock."

"I haven't seen her," returned Eleanor curtly.

"Do you know where she is?"

Eleanor hesitated, then remembered that she did not know just where
Sylvy's parents lived; it was somewhere in the country, but where she
could not tell.

"Answer me," said Mrs. Murdoch. "Where is she?"

"I don't know, Cousin Ellen, at least, I know she has gone away
somewhere in the country, but I don't know where the place is. You said
you were going to send her away, and so she went anyhow."

"And you have known this all the time and haven't told me? Such deceit!"

"I don't know why I should have told," retorted Eleanor. "It wouldn't
have done Bubbles any good, and I love her a thousand million times
more than I do you, if she is black. She is white inside and I know you
are not."

"Eleanor!" Mrs. Murdoch spoke very sternly. "You are really the most
dreadful child I have ever encountered. I never had any one speak to me
as you have done. You are completely contaminated by your association
with servants."

"I don't tell stories, and I don't steal from the pantry, and I don't
do lots of things your children do," returned Eleanor thoroughly
defiant.

"Hush!" cried Mrs. Murdoch. "If it were not for worrying your mother
I should tell her very plainly what I think of you, but as it is, my
hands are tied. I shall have to pass over this as I have over many
other things. If Barbara has gone I wash my hands of her, and when your
mother returns she can do as she thinks fit about the affair. I am
not in a position to punish you as you deserve, but I wish you not to
address me or any of my family, except when absolutely necessary, while
we remain here."

However much Mrs. Murdoch was pleased at Bubbles' departure to Eleanor
it was a sore loss, and she went to bed that night clasping her dear
Ada close to her heart and shedding many tears for Bubbles. The absence
of the little colored girl in more ways than one, made it hard for
Eleanor, for now Bubbles could not be used as a scapegoat for Olive's
sly pilferings, nor for Don's tricks, and so by degrees it was Eleanor
herself upon whom all the blame was laid. Did anything happen to be
out of place, Eleanor had it last. Were there mud tracked through Mrs.
Murdoch's clean halls, Eleanor did it; and, since Mrs. Murdoch's blind
idolatry of her children did not permit her to see a fault in any one
of them, poor Eleanor was gradually made to believe herself a most
wicked person, and she was in danger of acquiring some of the very
qualities which were attributed to her.

It was Miss Reese who first noticed this, for she saw that the child's
sunny little face was now habitually clouded and that, whereas she had
formerly been responsive to gentle chiding for some slight fault, she
was beginning to show open defiance, and so the teacher called upon
Mrs. Murdoch and very tactfully brought around the conversation to the
subject which was upon her mind.

"You find Olive and Jessie tractable, I hope," said Mrs. Murdoch.

"Yes," returned Miss Reese, "Jessie particularly. I have some times
thought that Olive was not as frank as I should like her to be, but I
may be mistaken."

Mrs. Murdoch's visible resentment showed Miss Reese that she was upon
dangerous ground. "That is a quality that belongs to Eleanor rather
than to Olive," Mrs. Murdoch said. "The child has been brought up very
unwisely."

"Why, what do you mean?" Miss Reese was surprised into saying. "I have
always thought Mrs. Dallas one of the tenderest and most devoted of
mothers. Every one thinks Eleanor one of the best behaved little girls
in town; for myself I think she is a charming child."

"One can never tell unless one lives in the house with such a
character," said Mrs. Murdoch, sighing. "Your estimate simply proves
what I say that Eleanor is vain and deceitful."

Miss Reese began to take in the situation but she only said:

"I think a teacher has an excellent opportunity for judging of the
characters of those placed in her care, and I cannot agree with you,
Mrs. Murdoch." Then she took her leave, resolved to give more attention
to Eleanor from this out.




                              _CHAPTER V_

                            _More Trouble_


It was about two weeks after Bubbles' departure that Eleanor, coming
home one day from school, found her new doll missing and her precious
Jungle Book out of its place on her shelves. She searched high and low
but could find neither book nor doll. She gave to her dolls a devoted
affection. They seemed real persons to her and any indignity offered
to them cut her to the very heart. Once in a while she had forgotten
and had left some special member of her family out in the garden all
night and her self-reproach upon discovering it was great. It was as if
she felt upon her own tender body the dews of night, and as if pangs
of hunger had been hers, and after that, for days, the victim of her
forgetfulness would be treated with extra care and tenderness.

For her books she had the feeling that is that of every true
book-lover. It hurt her to see her treasured volumes laid face down,
or to see thumb-marks soiling one of the clean pages or to come across
a leaf turned down; therefore she dreaded to see one of her beloved
books in Donald's hands. Donald was no respecter of the property
of others, and if he wanted a book he usually helped himself to it
and kept it in the playhouse as long as it suited him. He was very
tenacious, it may be said, about his right to the playhouse, and always
kept the door locked and the key in his pocket when he was not in the
small building, so that Eleanor had no opportunity of going in there to
search for any of her lost treasures.

She sighed as she thought some day she would probably find her Jungle
Book, soiled and with dingy covers, returned to her shelves, but Donald
professed to despise dolls and what could he want to do with her dear
Ada? She determined to ask him if he had seen her doll, and to be very
polite when she did it; so she waited patiently till she should hear
him come in.

It was cold November weather and the winter was fast approaching.
Eleanor shuddered as she thought of Ada lying somewhere out in the
chill wind, but she said very sweetly, "Donald, have you seen anything
of my new doll?"

"What do you suppose I know about your old doll?" he returned.

"I can't find her anywhere," Eleanor went on wistfully. "I left her
sitting on my bed this morning, and I have hunted high and low for her."

"You didn't look in the flour barrel, I suppose," said Donald laughing.

"No. Oh, you didn't put her in there, did you? She will smother." And
she hurried off to the pantry to examine the contents of the barrel.

Mrs. Murdoch coming saw her there. "Eleanor, what are you doing?" she
asked sharply. "You charge Olive with pilfering from my store of cakes
and I find you in here. What does this mean?"

"I am only looking for my doll, Cousin Ellen," Eleanor replied, too
much worried to notice the implied charges.

"A queer place to look for a doll."

"Donald asked me if I had looked in the flour barrel, and I want so
much to find her."

"As if he would put a doll in there. He has better sense than to do
such a thing," said Mrs. Murdoch. "Your excuse is a very lame one,
Eleanor."

But Eleanor paid little heed to her and again sought Donald, who
jeeringly said: "When she's up she's up, and when she's down she's
down, and when she's half-way up she's neither up nor down." And that
was all Eleanor could get out of him.

Up and downstairs she trudged, looking in every room but no Ada was to
be found. All over the garden she searched, but no Ada was there, but
at last the child caught sight of something swinging from the garret
window, and going closer, she saw Ada clad in her little nightgown and
tied by the neck to a string which was suspended from a nail in the
eaves. Upstairs Eleanor rushed, feeling as if she could not endure such
treatment of her doll. She was in an agony of sympathy for poor Ada,
but, try as she would, she could not grasp the string which hung just
beyond her reach and could only be touched by standing on the ledge
outside the window.

Eleanor was always desperately afraid to stand on high places, but
her eagerness to gain possession of her doll, nerved her to climb out
and stand upon the sill. She caught the string in one hand and with a
dreadful feeling that Ada's body was thumping against the side of the
house, she managed to climb in again and drew up the precious burden to
find the doll a little scarred, but otherwise unhurt.

The child was now in such a nervous tremor that she felt her limbs
shaking under her as she sank down on the garret floor giving vent to
quick little sobs. "We won't stand it, Ada; we won't," she said. "We
will run away, too. We will go with the butterman and find Sylvy and
Bubbles. They love me better than these cousins." She had always been
used to having negro servants about her and the idea of going to Sylvy
did not affect her as it might have done a child not accustomed to
being petted and coddled by a negro nursemaid.

"To-morrow the butterman comes again and we will hide somewhere, Ada,
and go with him. I hope Bubbles found Sylvy. I haven't heard a word
about her, but I hope she got there all right. I must write a note to
Miss Reese, for she will wonder why I am not at school. I will mail it
in the morning." The little inconsequent mind did not see any further
troubles arising from her purpose, and she began to make her plans.
"I will write to mamma and tell her I did not mean to be bad but that
they made me so, and I'll tell her I am safe and that I am going to
stay till she comes back," she told her doll. Then she tied up a little
bundle of her own clothing, and put in what she considered proper
apparel for Ada, and then she wrote her little note to Miss Reese:

    "DEAR MISS REESE:

    "I can't come to school because I am going away. I'm so miserble
    without mamma and nobody loves me. Ime not going because I dont
    like to go to school and plese excuse my lessons I will study very
    hard when mamma comes back

                                                  "Affectionately yours
                                                       "ELEANOR DALLAS.

    "P.S.--I forgot to tell you ime going to stay with Sylvy and
    Bubbles."

She decided that she would go to school and at recess she would slip
out and be on the corner when the butterman drove by. She would leave
her bundle with old Mrs. Wills who kept a small shop near the school.
She felt distressed at leaving her other dolls and Nyxy, her little
black cat, but she laid the former carefully away in a drawer, after
fondly kissing each smiling face, locked the drawer and took the key
with her. Nyxy she knew would be well cared for. Jessie was devoted to
him and the cook was fond of cats, and therefore with a soft whisper
and a loving pat, Eleanor bade good-bye to her furry pet the next
morning and started out alone. She did not often walk to school with
her cousins nowadays, for Olive usually stopped for Janet Forrester and
Jessie had a friend about her own age who called for her almost every
morning, therefore Eleanor was not observed as she stepped out with her
bundle and hurried along to Mrs. Wills before the others started.

Mrs. Wills cheerfully took charge of the bundle, patted Eleanor's
shoulder and gave her a cocoanut cake. Her little shop was beginning to
show Christmas wares and it gave Eleanor a pang to think that perhaps
this year there would be no mamma on hand to plan delightful surprises.
The tears gathered in her eyes as she went on to school, stopping to
mail her letter to Miss Reese on the way.

She arrived quite early and found the schoolroom empty of every one
except her teacher. Miss Reese looked up with a smile. "Good-morning,
Eleanor," she said. "This is quite a frosty morning, isn't it? It
promises cold weather soon. I suppose you are glad of that, for your
mamma thought she would be home by Christmas, I remember."

"I'm afraid she won't be," returned Eleanor. "Papa wasn't so well when
she last wrote."

"Oh, that's too bad. Never mind, you can have a good time with your
cousins. It must be very lively for you to have so many playmates,
after being the only child in the house."

Eleanor did not reply, but there was a quivering of her lips that told
Miss Reese more than words could have done. "Did you come to school on
your wheel?" Miss Reese asked, changing the subject.

"No, Miss Reese. Don has broken it. I hate Don."

"Why, my child."

"I do. I can't help it if I am wicked and selfish and--and deceitful,
I just hate him," she said, going to her desk and hiding her face
behind the lid as she raised it that Miss Reese might not see her
tears. But just then in came a troop of girls and no more was said,
although Miss Reese made a mental note of Eleanor's words.

At recess Eleanor asked permission to go to Mrs. Wills' little shop.
This was often accorded the girls and consent was given to the child,
who, however, waited till the last moment and then ran out, passing
the girls returning from having made their purchases of sour balls or
ginger cakes or buns.

"You'd better hurry up," said Laura Field; "the bell will ring in a
minute."

Eleanor nodded in reply, and ran on, secured her bundle and hurried
around the corner to overtake the butterman. But just as she reached
the spot where she intended to wait for him she saw the white top of
his wagon ahead of her, and she ran with all her might toward it,
calling: "Mr. Snyder, Mr. Snyder, please wait for me," but his sleek
brown horses trotted on and the child, breathlessly following, at last,
dropped into a walk, but still determined to overtake him.

On and on she went up the hard country road where fewer and fewer
houses were to be seen, and at last she saw the wagon turn into a lane,
and outside the gate she sat down to wait till the butterman should
come out again. She was very warm and tired and a cough which she had
noticed for some days, began to trouble her more than before. The cold
wind struck her and in a few minutes she was shivering, but she was not
the less firm in her determination to go on to find Sylvy.

But as she sat there huddled up she heard a horse's hoofs come
clattering along the road and she saw the flash of a scarlet jacket as
a tiny Shetland pony came dashing along bearing as his rider a swarthy
little girl, whose black tousled hair was tossed about by the wind. She
drew rein as she saw Eleanor there and came cantering up to her. "What
you doing?" she asked, slipping down from her pony and peering down
with her bright eyes into Eleanor's face.

"I'm waiting for the butterman," answered Eleanor shyly.

"Wha' for?"

"'Cause I want him to take me along with him."

"I'll take you. Want to ride my pony? Come; there ain't no man coming."

Eleanor looked up toward the house before the gate of which she was
waiting. "He's in there," she said.

The girl shook her black locks. "No, he's gone t'other way."

Eleanor looked distressed. "Are you sure?" she asked.

The girl nodded. "I'll take you. Come 'long. Tossi can take us both."

"Oh, no, he's too little."

The girl laughed. "He's very strong. No, it won't hurt him. He loves me
and I don't let him be hurt." She flung her arms around the neck of the
pony and kissed the white star on his forehead.

Eleanor at last consented to mount him, sitting behind the girl
and holding fast to her as they dashed up the road. Once she asked
breathlessly: "Do you know where the butterman lives? His name is Mr.
Snyder."

"I knows him," returned her companion laughing, but she did not stop
till they came in sight of a group of gaudy wagons.

"Oh!" cried Eleanor. "Those are gipsies."

The girl jumped down. "My people," she said with a wave of her hand.

"Are you a gipsy?" Eleanor was quite taken aback.

The girl nodded in reply, standing with one arm over the neck of her
little pony.

"But I want to go to Mr. Snyder's," said Eleanor helplessly, all the
stories she had ever heard of gipsies coming to her mind.

The girl led the pony slowly along toward the wagons and Eleanor could
see that beyond them, in a small enclosure, were many horses, and that
in some of the wagons, with their red and yellow adornings, were women
and children. "Please don't go on," she said. "I don't want to go
there."

"Wha' for?" again said the girl.

"I want to find Mr. Snyder."

"He your papa?"

"No."

"You live there?"

"No."

"Then wha' for?"

"I want him to take me somewhere. Perhaps you know where Sylvy Johnson
lives. She is a colored woman. I would just as soon go to her house as
to Mr. Snyder's."

The girl shook her head. "Don't know. We had a little nigger girl not
long ago. She went to the orspital, my brodder say. She was hurted."
Then she suddenly looked up saying: "I like you. I wish you'd stay and
see my big brudder. He have anudder pony like this one; he'll let you
ride on him."

At this moment one of the dark, queer-looking women came from one of
the wagons toward them and Eleanor took affright. "Oh, no, please,--I
am very much obliged to you for letting me ride your pony; he is a
darling, but I am afraid to stay. I'm not afraid of you, for you are
a very nice, kind little girl, but I do want to go. I am so tired,
and--and--please."

"Come on." The girl swung herself upon the pony, and giving the pretty
creature a slap with her hand she made him turn around and they were
soon dashing down the road again to the spot where Eleanor had been
first seen by the gipsy girl.

Eleanor got down and looked up the lane. "Does Mr. Snyder live in
there?" she asked.

"Don't know."

"But you said you knew where he lived."

"No, I says I know him, an' so I does."

"But you said he had gone out another way."

"Maybe. I don't know. No, he's comin' now. I see his wagon top. I said
that because I wanted you to come and see my brudder and me."

"Are you going to be at that place long?"

"Don't know. P'r'aps. You want to buy a pony? My brudder will sell you
a good one cheap."

"I'd like to have one like yours. Isn't he a beauty? I always wanted
to ride a little pony like this, and I am glad I could do it. Did your
father give it to you?"

"No, I haven't got no fadder."

"Your mother then?"

"No," the girl shook her head. "I haven't got no mudder; my brudder
give him to me. What you got in your bundle?"

"Some clothes and my doll named Ada."

"I got a doll too; her name is--what's your name?"

"Eleanor."

"Her name is Eleanor like you."

"What is your name?"

"Zula."

"I think that is a pretty name. I'll name my next doll that."

"Come and see me and I'll show you my doll. My brudder bought it for
me. I like your ribbon on your hair. Give it to me."

Eleanor hesitated. She didn't like to refuse and yet she did not know
whether it was exactly right to give it to her, but finally she did
take it off, for she thought Zula had really been very kind. "Here,"
she said, "you may have it."

Zula tied it around her black tresses and laughed. "Here comes Snyder,"
she said, "good-bye." And jumping on her horse she was off like a flash.

Eleanor watched her red jacket out of sight and then said to herself,
"I wish I had asked her more about that little colored girl. I wonder
if she was a servant or what. I'm glad Bubbles don't have to go
traveling around the country with gipsies. She'll be glad to see me,
and so will Sylvy. What a long time Mr. Snyder has been at that house."




                             _CHAPTER VI_

                          _Where is Bubbles?_


At last the man came driving down the lane. He drew rein as he saw
the little figure by the gate. "Want a lift, little girl?" he asked
cheerfully.

"Yes, please," Eleanor responded. And the man helped her up beside him.

"How far are you going?" he asked.

"To Sylvy's," Eleanor answered in all simplicity.

"To Sylvy's? You don't mean Sylvy Johnson's? No wonder you want a lift.
What are you going away off there for? It is a long way for a little
girl to go alone. Bless me!" He looked closer. "Bless my soul, if it
isn't the little Dallas girl! Why, what does this mean? What's the
matter at your house that they're running you off in this fashion?"

Eleanor's cough interrupted her speech for a moment, and the man tucked
a warm cover closer around her. "See here," he continued, "I'll take
you home with me, and we'll see what's to be done. I'm not in the
notion of your going to Johnson's by yourself. How did you expect to
get back?"

"I didn't expect to get back at all, at least, not till mamma comes
home."

"Why, that's the queerest thing I ever heard. Did Mrs. Murdoch send you
off there?"

"No," Eleanor confessed, "I am going of my own accord. Cousin Ellen
doesn't know anything about it."

"Hm--hm." Mr. Snyder nodded thoughtfully. "Well, Mrs. Snyder will
settle it. I can't take you back just at once, for I must go home and
feed my horses, and get a bite myself, but if mother says so, home you
go."

"Oh, no, please," begged Eleanor. "I want to go to Sylvy's."

"Well, you wait and see what my wife says. Mrs. Snyder'll know what's
best. 'Tain't much further; only a couple of miles. Here, get up, Pete.
Get up, Morgan." And the horses quickened their trot soon bringing
them up to a substantial white house standing back some distance from
the road. "Here we are," said Mr. Snyder, lifting Eleanor down. "Whoa
there, Pete! I'd better fasten that horse; he's dead set on getting to
the stable. He knows it's his dinner time."

A rosy-faced woman came to the side door. "Here, mother," said Mr.
Snyder, "I've got company for you; Mr. Dallas's little girl. Run in,
honey, out of the cold. It's blowing up, mother. Take the little girl
in where it's warm, and I'll come as soon as I've fed the stock."

Into a clean warm kitchen Eleanor was led. There was an odor of fried
ham and potatoes, and from an iron pot, bubbling on the stove, came
a spicy smell. "Take off your things, honey," said Mrs. Snyder in a
matter-of-fact way, as if the coming of a strange little girl to dinner
were an everyday occurrence, and Eleanor obeyed, glad of the warmth and
the welcome.

Mr. Snyder was not long gone, and when he returned he remarked, "This
young lady wants to go to Johnson's, Almiry. What do you think of that?"

"Not to stay!" said Mrs. Snyder, pausing in the act of taking a pan of
biscuits from the oven. "You wasn't meaning to stay, was you?" she
asked Eleanor.

"Yes, till my mother comes home. You see, Bubbles is there, at least,
I suppose she is. Didn't she come with you about two weeks ago, Mr.
Snyder?"

"With me? No, indeed. Do you mean the little darky girl that lives at
your house? Haven't laid eyes on her."

"Oh!" Eleanor's eyes grew big with anxiety, and her chin began to
quiver. "Then she's lost, unless she is at Sylvy's. Won't you please
take me there?"

"Why, child," said Mrs. Snyder, "that ain't a fit place for you; just
a little two-story cabin with a loft. What on earth possesses you to
want to go there? Hear the child cough, Ben. Sounds to me like the
whooping-cough; mighty like it. I shouldn't be surprised if the child
had it. She oughtn't to be running wild around the country in this way."

"Oh, do you think I really have it? I am so glad," Eleanor exclaimed in
a satisfied tone.

Mr. Snyder laughed. "Funny thing to be glad about."

"Why, you see, they have all got it at my aunt's in the city and that
is why I couldn't go there when mamma went away, and now maybe I can."

"But what put it into your head to come so far from home to-day?" Mrs.
Snyder asked.

Eleanor hung her head. "Because--because, Don hung my doll, and I can't
bear him, and they don't believe anything I say, and nobody loves me,
and I was so lonely I just couldn't stand it."

Mrs. Snyder looked at her husband and then gathered Eleanor into her
motherly arms. "Poor little thing! Homesick in her own home; mother
sick, I reckon. Let us keep her here a bit, Ben. You told me a month
ago that Mrs. Dallas had gone off to them Hot Springs and left the
child with kinfolks. I remember, because you said you'd never had
no complaint of your butter and eggs from that house in all these
years, and you reckoned Mrs. Murdoch was kind of fussy. Ain't her name
Murdoch?"

"Yes, that's it; Murdoch. She did say the butter was too salt and
couldn't I bring her bigger eggs; these was too small; and I told her
I'd call the hen's attention to it, and tell them they must keep their
tape-measures in their pockets. She didn't half like that. Fact is, she
told me she'd get some one else to serve her."

"And that house has been supplied by you ever since Mrs. Dallas went
there a bride. Well, child, I guess your mother didn't know who she was
leaving you with. I reckon you haven't been very well looked after.
Here, set right up here and eat some dinner. She looks kind of blue
around the mouth, Ben. I don't think she'd ought to go back to-day, in
this cold wind."

"Then, I'll send word to Mrs. Murdoch by Lem. He can go some time
before night; I'd as lief let her worry for a while. He can go 'round
by Johnson's and see if the little darky is there. Very likely she's
all snug with them. Some one else probably gave her a lift. I remember,
now, I didn't go to town on Wednesday week. I went to that sale over
by the crossroads, and I got Nat Gilam to go for me. No doubt she went
with him to Johnson's. Don't you worry about her, honey. What you got
bilin' in that pot, mother?"

"Suet puddin'. Seemed like the day for it. I'd as lief let her fuss for
a while, that Mrs. Murdoch, I mean. Butter too salt, indeed."

"Give the child somethin' to eat, mother; she ain't scarcely touched
anything."

"She's half sick," said Mrs. Snyder, regarding the child with kind
eyes. "Don't you pester her, Mr. Snyder. I'll look after her. I've lost
six," she said to Eleanor, "and it's mighty lonely sometimes. I'm glad
enough to see a little child, once in a while."

"There, mother, there; don't let's talk about it now," said Mr. Snyder;
"you'll be losin' your appetite next. I'm savin' a place for that suet
puddin' myself."

Eleanor watched with wonder the huge amount of food which Mr. Snyder
consumed, but she hardly tasted any herself, and after the good man
had left the kitchen and Mrs. Snyder had washed the dishes and put
them away, she took the child on her lap and rocked her in an old
splint-bottomed chair which had a cozy squeak to it, so that, feeling
very content, Eleanor fell asleep to the accompaniment of creaking
chair and singing teakettle.

She did not awaken till the short winter day had ended. Once she
stirred and was dimly conscious of being placed in a more comfortable
position, and felt herself warmly covered up and a soft kiss imprinted
upon her cheek; then she dropped into a sound sleep, to dream that her
mother was near her; that it was soft spring weather and the birds were
singing in the apple-tree by the kitchen door.

It was when Mr. Snyder came noisily into the kitchen that she sat up
and rubbed her eyes, wondering where she was. "There, now, Ben, you've
waked the child, and she was sleeping so sweetly. I think she's got a
little fever." Mrs. Snyder bent over her, looking much concerned. "How
do you feel, my dear? Are you rested?"

"Oh, yes." Eleanor threw off the shawl which had covered her, and arose
to her feet. "I feel very much rested, thank you, Mrs. Snyder."

"Bless her dear heart!" exclaimed Mrs. Snyder, hugging her up close to
her.

Eleanor gave a sigh of satisfaction. "It was so nice to have you rock
me to sleep," she said. "It made me feel as if I had mamma again."

"I went over to see about your little Bubbles," said Mr. Snyder, "but
nobody's seen her. Sylvy showed every tooth in her head when she saw
me, and I told her you were here with us. I could scarcely keep her
from coming right over, but I told her you were too tired and were
taking a nap. How far did you trot behind my wagon? All the way out
from town to Murphy's, mother. That's where I met up with her. Sylvy
says she will be here to-morrow, and I've sent word to your cousin that
you are safe and sound, but that you've got the whooping-cough. That'll
finish the business, I think, mother. Those precious children of hers
are all made of gold studded with diamonds, and if there's any way to
prevent your coming near them she'll agree to it." He nodded knowingly
at Eleanor.

Two red spots were burning on the child's cheeks; her eyes were very
bright, and her hands hot, so that Mrs. Snyder declared that she must
go to bed early, and after supper, for which Eleanor had but little
appetite, she was dosed with an herby draught and snugly placed between
warm sheets in a clean little room where a wood stove roared and sent
out a pleasant heat. "I shall be right in here," Mrs. Snyder said, "so
don't you be scared. If your cough is bad in the night, I'll come in
and give you something for it." She stooped to give a good-night kiss,
and Eleanor reached out her arms from under the covers and clasped the
good woman's neck.

"I do love you," she said. "Nobody has kissed me good-night since
mamma went away. Where do you suppose poor little Bubbles is? Oh, Mrs.
Snyder, I am so distressed about her. I'm afraid she might be the one
that Zula, the gipsy girl, told me about. Why didn't I ask more about
her? I never thought it might be Bubbles. I thought of course that she
was safe with Sylvy."

"There, dear, there, Mr. Snyder'll see about it the first thing in the
morning," said Mrs. Snyder.

But Eleanor kept repeating: "What has become of her? Poor little
Bubbles!" She sobbed piteously, and for all Mrs. Snyder comforted her
as best she could, it was a long time before she could go to sleep, and
when she did her pillow was wet with tears.

Meantime, quite a stir was caused by Eleanor's long absence. Olive and
Jessie returned home from school with the news that Eleanor had not
been seen since eleven o'clock, when she was met by some of the girls
on her way to Mrs. Wills'. Miss Reese had questioned the old woman who
remembered that the little Dallas girl had been there. Yes, she had
been there, and she had not stopped long; but Mrs. Wills said nothing
about the bundle which Eleanor had left in her care and which she had
taken away with her. The old woman had a very poor memory, at the best,
and she was peculiar.

Miss Reese stopped to report the result of her inquiries to Mrs.
Murdoch. "Just like the child," said the latter; "she delights to annoy
me, and has taken this means of doing it. She probably wanted to play
truant, and will be coming toward night, no doubt." Nevertheless, there
was an undercurrent of anxiety, and some qualms of conscience regarding
the child's real reason for going off in this stealthy way, and as the
afternoon wore on and no Eleanor appeared, Mrs. Murdoch became more
and more annoyed. "The child was left in my care," she said to Olive,
"and her mother will censure me if anything happens to her. Do you
and Donald hunt around the house and grounds for her, and I will send
Jessie to the houses where she would be most likely to visit."

But after a thorough search, Olive, of course, reported that no Eleanor
was to be found, and then, just as Mrs. Murdoch was really getting
worked up into a state of nervous fear and dread, Miss Reese came in.
"I have just received a little note from Eleanor," she said, "and she
tells me that she has gone to find Bubbles." She handed the note to
Mrs. Murdoch, who read it without a word, although under Miss Reese's
quiet gaze, she flushed slightly.

"It is not always easy to understand children," said Miss Reese gently.
"Often their little hearts are bleeding under an indifferent, and,
often, defiant exterior. Eleanor has always had a life so full of
love and sympathy that any lack of it would probably affect her more
seriously than it would a less emotional child."

"I am sure I have tried to do my duty," said Mrs. Murdoch plaintively.
"I have bathed her with my own hands more than once, and I have been
most particular to see that she was properly clad, and I have seen to
it that she had her study hour."

Miss Reese said only: "She is safe, at all events. I think that Dr.
Sullivan goes out in that direction and perhaps, to-morrow, he will
stop and bring her back with him. He is very fond of her, I know, and
it would not be asking him to perform an unpleasant task. Shall I speak
to him about it?"

"I shall be very much relieved if you will," returned Mrs. Murdoch,
glad to see a way out of the difficulty; and Miss Reese departed. But
next came word from Mr. Snyder that Eleanor was at his house, and
that she was not well; Mrs. Snyder had a suspicion that she might be
developing the whooping-cough. Perhaps she would best stay where she
was till the truth could be learned from the doctor.

Therefore, much against his will, Donald was dispatched to take word
to Miss Reese and to the doctor. "That child will be the death of me,"
complained Mrs. Murdoch. "I wish to heavens I had never undertaken the
care of her. I know nothing about these people to whom she has gone."

But a call from the doctor reassured her. "She couldn't be in better
hands," he said. "I'll stop there to-morrow and see how she is. Bless
the little monkey! she ought to have come to me, if she was sick. She
is a dear child, one of the sweetest I ever knew, and that is a good
deal for a doctor to say." Mrs. Murdoch probably did not agree with
him, but she did not say so.

But Eleanor, sleeping soundly, did not concern herself about any of
this and little knew what the morrow had in store for her.




                             _CHAPTER VII_

                             _Uncle Heath_


The little girl's thoughts upon first awakening were concerning
Bubbles. She slipped out of bed and as she jumped upon the braided mat
which lay upon the floor the noise informed Mrs. Snyder that she was
up and her pleasant face appeared at the door. "Scramble back again,
honey," she said, "till I get this fire stirred up. The room will be
warm in a jiffy if I put in a stick of wood and open the drafts. Mr.
Snyder's gone to hunt up them gipsies; he'll be back by the time you're
ready for breakfast. Can you dress yourself? If you want me to fasten
any buttons, just run down to the kitchen. I've some bread in the oven
and I must be looking after it."

Eleanor hurried to dress, for she was very anxious to hear if Bubbles
had been seen by the gipsies, and she was at the kitchen window
watching for Mr. Snyder when he drove up. He entered the room in his
usual hearty blustering way. "Breakfast ready, mother?" he asked.

"All ready. I'm dishing up now."

"Hallo, little one!" Mr. Snyder drew Eleanor to his knee. "Well, I've
been to the gipsy camp, and they've cleared out; every hoof. It is
getting too late for them and they want to get south. I'm sorry but it
don't seem to me that Bubbles could be with them; more likely she's
with some of the darkies in town."

Eleanor shook her head. "No, she wouldn't go to any of them, 'cause she
told me she meant to come out here to Sylvy, for Sylvy said when she
left, if Bubbles couldn't get along with Cousin Ellen she could come to
her. You see, she's known Bubbles all her life; ever since Bubbles was
a baby, and it isn't likely she'd go to any one else."

"That's so." Mr. Snyder nodded thoughtfully. "And you say that little
gipsy girl told you there was a colored child at the camp?"

"Yes," Eleanor answered.

"Those gipsies have been about here for a couple of weeks. I mind just
when they came. Yes, it might be her. Well, Sylvy's coming over after
a bit, and we'll see what she says about it. It seems to me if the
child the gipsies had was Bubbles, that they would have let Sylvy know,
or would have sent the child to her. Come now, breakfast is ready."

It was impossible, even with this anxiety of mind, not to enjoy Mrs.
Snyder's delicious rolls and sweet butter, her honey and her country
sausage, and Eleanor really ate heartily, although she was not feeling
very well, and her cough troubled her. Mrs. Snyder suggested all sorts
of queer remedies, chief among which was a decoction made from a
hornet's nest which Eleanor rejected emphatically. "Oh, please, Mrs.
Snyder, I shouldn't want that. It might make me feel a buzzy and stingy
inside."

Mrs. Snyder laughed, and just then Sylvy came in. Eleanor greeted her
joyfully. "Oh, Sylvy," she said, "I'm so glad to see you, but where do
you suppose poor Bubbles is? I feel so dreadfully about her."

"Me too, honey," said Sylvy. "It on mah min' all de time. Tell me jes'
how it happen she quit Miss Murdoch." And Eleanor related her woeful
little tale which brought many "uh-uhms" and "dar nows," from Sylvy.

"I git mah fathah to go 'roun' an' fin' out what he kin," said Sylvy,
after Eleanor had concluded, "an' if nobody ain't seen her I'll reckon
she's the one the gipsy folks has. How long yuh gwine stay here, honey?"

"I wish I could stay here till I hear from mamma. I like Mrs. Snyder
and she says I am to stay to-day, anyhow."

She seemed so much brighter that morning that Mrs. Snyder's fears that
she might have a very ill child on her hands were allayed, and Mr.
Snyder joked with her saying he believed it was a disappointment to his
wife not to have secured some one needing her nursing.

"Now, father," Mrs. Snyder protested, "it isn't that, but I'd like to
keep the child here."

"So you shall, till we hear what the doctor says. If she's got the
whoops she can't go back to school and she'll not be very welcome at
Mrs. Murdoch's, I'll venture to say."

It was about noon that the doctor's buggy drove up. Sylvy, who had been
giving Mrs. Snyder a helping hand in the kitchen, caught sight of the
doctor's white horse. "Hyar come Dr. Sullivan," she said. "I knows that
white horse of his'n."

Eleanor ran to the window. "It is Dr. Sullivan, and he is coming here.
There is some one with him; I wonder who it is."

"Miss Murdoch?"

"No, not Cousin Ellen; it is a man; I see his hat."

"Don't run out in the cold hall," Mrs. Snyder warned her. "The
doctor will ride around to the side porch and I'll take him into the
settin'-room. I'm glad there's a good fire in there, for it's snapping
cold this morning."

Eleanor waited till she heard the doctor's hearty voice say: "I'll have
you up for kidnapping, Mrs. Snyder. Where's that little girl of mine?
Bless her heart, why didn't she come tell me her troubles? Here is
somebody she'll be glad to see, if I'm not mistaken."

At this Eleanor ran in to see, not only her friend the doctor, but her
dearly loved Uncle Heath. With a cry of joy she threw herself into the
arms of the latter, forgetting every one else.

"Here, here," cried the doctor, "I want some of those kisses; don't
give them all away. Look here, baby, what's all this row about, anyhow?
What did you cut and run for?"

Eleanor hung her head, and then, by dint of questioning, they reached
the root of the matter. The two men looked at each other, and the
doctor said under his breath: "I'd like to have the dosing of that boy
for about a week."

"Oh, Uncle Heath, you won't let me go back to Cousin Ellen, will you?"
Eleanor said with entreaty in her tones.

He took her up in his lap and stroked her hair. "No, Miss Dimps, I
have come on purpose to take you back home with me. On our way from
California your Aunt Dora and I stopped to see your father and mother,
and I have my pockets full of love for you." He did not say that Rock
had sent his mother Eleanor's pitiful little letter and on account of
this, more than anything else, Mrs. Heath Dallas and her husband had
hurried home that Eleanor might come to them.

The little girl's hand stole into her uncle's pocket as if to gather up
some of the love of which he spoke, and she nestled closer to him.

"Imagine my surprise when I called upon Mrs. Murdoch last evening to be
told that you were not there," her Uncle Heath went on. "I was referred
to our good friend, Dr. Sullivan, and here we are, ready to pick you up
and carry you back with us."

"Weren't you s'prised not to see Sylvy or Bubbles come to the door at
our house? And, oh, doesn't it look queer with the furniture in the
parlor all switched around in a different way from that mamma used to
have it?"

"I'm afraid those things made very little impression on me, for I was
very anxious to see my little niece and didn't think of any one else.
Now, how soon can you be ready to go back with me?"

A fit of coughing brought from the doctor: "Here, here, what is that?
The child has the whooping-cough."

"Yes," said Eleanor between her gasps, "Mrs. Snyder told me so."

"Then, that settles it; you can't go back to Mrs. Murdoch. She'd sweep
you out with a broom, and then go into hysterics for fear her children
had caught the disease."

"Do you suppose they have?"

"I can't say; it is not improbable, but at all events, you'd best not
go back there. Mrs. Sullivan will keep you till you are ready to take
your journey, I am sure."

"Sylvy can go in with me," Uncle Heath said. "She knows where your
traps are, I suppose, and she can help Mrs. Murdoch to get them ready
for you. Your mamma said all your toys and such things of yours as
might be in the way, were to be locked up in your little house in the
yard."

"Oh,"--Eleanor exclaimed, and then stopped short.

"What's the matter?" asked her uncle.

"Why, Donald has that, and it's so dirty and battered up out there."

"How is that? What is Donald doing out there? Did your mamma say he was
to use your playhouse?"

Eleanor explained, and Uncle Heath's eyes snapped as he said, "We'll
let Sylvy go in and clean it up; then she can carry back your
belongings and set them in place. I'll have a Yale lock put on the door
and the windows boarded up. I have a letter from your mamma in which
she tells exactly what is to be done, and there will be no trouble in
carrying out her wishes, I think."

"Uncle Heath, you are a darling, but I wish you'd do just one thing
more."

"And what is that?"

"Let Rock come home from boarding-school; he isn't having a bit of a
nice time."

"I know it, and although boys aren't usually sent away from home
to school to have a good time, he is coming away for the Christmas
holidays and will not return. I suppose you'd like me to carry Sylvy,
and perhaps the doctor, back with me," he said, pinching her cheek.

"Yes, I should like that."

"Leave me out," said the doctor, "I can't neglect my practice for any
youngster's whims."

"But you will try to find Bubbles, won't you, Uncle Heath?" Eleanor
asked wistfully. "Do you suppose she could be in Baltimore at the
hospital? You know Zula said her brother had taken a little colored
girl to a hospital."

"What do you think, doctor?"

"She might be in Baltimore or in Washington. I'll tell you what I'll
do, Dimple; I'll telegraph to the different hospitals in both cities as
soon as I get back home, and we'll find out I think without doubt. By
the way, what is Bubbles' name?"

Eleanor looked at Sylvy. "It's Barbara, but I never thought about her
having any other name."

"It's Markey," said Sylvy.

The doctor took out his notebook and jotted it down, and then repeated
his assurance that he would use every effort to find out what had
become of Bubbles.

Then it was settled that they should start the next morning. Sylvy
went in bright and early and the little playhouse was made as clean
as hands could make it, and it must be confessed that she took great
satisfaction in turning out Master Donald and in re-establishing
Eleanor's toys in their accustomed places. To be sure Donald blustered
and was inclined to do battle for the possession of the house, but
a few words from Mr. Heath Dallas settled the matter and his mother
assuring him that he could now have Eleanor's room he was pacified.

"He's not really a bad boy," her Uncle Heath told Eleanor, "but he is
spoiled, and has been made to believe that every one should yield to
him, so he has become very selfish and cannot imagine any rights that
conflict with his wishes."

"Rock isn't that way."

"No, he has a wise mother."

Rock was Mr. Heath Dallas' stepson. He and Eleanor were great friends,
and she looked forward with great delight to seeing him again. She was
planning many happy times with him and with her Cousin Florence who
lived not far from Mr. Heath Dallas. She asked her uncle if he thought
Rock had had the whooping-cough. "Suppose he hasn't," she said.

"To be sure, I hadn't thought of that. I am pretty sure he has though,
and at any rate, we'll take it for granted, and if he hasn't we can
settle the question before he gets home."

"I could go to Aunt Nellie's, you know."

"Yes, but I hope we can keep you with us till your papa and mamma
return."

Eleanor gave a little satisfied sigh. Her uncle had driven out from
town to take her back with him, and she was about to take leave of
good Mr. and Mrs. Snyder. Ada, attired in her grey traveling dress,
and carrying her muff, was ready to go, and Sylvy had pressed so many
cakes, apples and such things upon the child that she had to leave half
of them behind her. To Sylvy, even the shortest journey demanded a
supply of eatables.

The doctor had made every effort to discover the whereabouts of
Bubbles, but had received no news of her from any of the hospitals.

"If she is still with the gipsies, she would hardly have reached the
city yet," Eleanor was told for her comfort. "You may find her in
Baltimore when you get there," the doctor said further, and Eleanor was
obliged to be satisfied with this for the present.

As they passed the gate of her own home, Eleanor hugged Ada closer and
looking up at her uncle said, "I never want to see my home again, Uncle
Heath, until mamma is in it."

He smiled down at her. "You probably will not, dear child. We shall
keep you with us as long as we can."

"I hope there won't be any children in the cars," continued the child,
"for I might give them the whooping-cough."

"We are going to have the little compartment at the end of the parlor
car, and we can be all to ourselves in there."

"Oh, can we? I've always wanted to travel in that little room, Uncle
Heath. Did you get it on purpose?"

"Not exactly, but being a railroad man, I had it placed at my disposal."

It was nearly dark when they reached the city. Eleanor looked out at
the stiff rows of houses, secretly glad that her home was not in one
of these. She did not wonder that her Cousin Florence always said that
she could not bear the city. "Uncle Heath," she said, "are all cities
like Baltimore, with so many, many houses all alike, with no gardens at
all and hardly any trees anywhere? I don't see why they can't have a
little bit of a garden in front of them, or porches to the houses, or
something. Cities are very ugly, aren't they?"

"Most of them are, but some do have a section where you can see pretty
gardens and porches and many trees. Washington, you know, is very
attractive, and so are parts of Philadelphia."

"Yes, I know Washington is, but I most forget Philadelphia, I've not
been there for so long."

"We must go there some pleasant day."

"Rock too?"

"Yes; but here we are. Run in quickly."

The door was thrown open by Aunt Dora herself, who almost lifted
Eleanor off her feet in the energy of her embrace. "You dear little
midget," she exclaimed, "you did come all safe and sound, didn't you?"

"Yes, I came, and so did Ada. I was so glad to see Uncle Heath."

"I knew you would be. Are you cold? No, your hands are quite warm, and
oh, yes; how do you do, Ada? I've not seen you for a long time," and
the doll's hand was gravely shaken by Aunt Dora, to Eleanor's delight.
"Let us go right upstairs," continued Aunt Dora, holding Eleanor's
hand closely in hers. "You are to have a little room next to mine. It
isn't very big, but I think you and Ada will fit into it without much
crowding."

"It isn't Rock's room?" said Eleanor, with a remembrance of her late
trials in some such direction.

"No, he has a room back of mine. I am so glad to get home again and to
have you come to us right away. It seems so very lonely without any
children in the house. I can hardly wait till Rock's holiday begins, to
have him with me again. I know he is counting the days."

"Yes, he wrote to me that he was. He makes a little mark on his
calendar every day."

"Yes, I know; the dear child. I have been planning a number of things
for the holidays, but first I must tell you about your papa; he is
really getting better, and I think if he will only consent to stay
long enough, that he will come back quite well." She stooped to kiss
Eleanor, and then continued: "You were a dear child not to write to
them of your worries."

"How did you know?"

"A little bird told me."

"Rock?"

"Maybe. We might call it a rock wren."

"Oh, Aunt Dora, has Rock had the whooping-cough?"

"Yes, several years ago."

"Did you know I had it?"

"Yes, your Uncle Heath wrote me that you had, and I have been thinking
ever since, just suppose that Ada should take it!" Aunt Dora raised her
hands in comic distress, and Eleanor looked gravely at her doll as if
there were danger in that direction.

"Never mind," said her Aunt Dora; "she will not take it, I am sure. Now
we will go down to dinner, if you are ready, and to-morrow I know the
first person you will want to see."

"Florence?"

Aunt Dora nodded yes. "She is to come over to luncheon and the next day
we will go out to do our Christmas shopping."

"Oh!" Eleanor was delighted, and she skipped downstairs by her aunt's
side, looking very unlike the forlorn little figure waiting on the
roadside for the butterman.

After dinner her uncle played dominoes with her and then her aunt took
her upstairs and read a lovely fairy tale to her, and after she was
snugly tucked in bed she had to have many good-night kisses before she
was satisfied.




                            _CHAPTER VIII_

                              _Shopping_


Two such happy little girls they were who met the next morning; and for
the first fifteen minutes they talked and laughed so hard that they
nearly whooped themselves speechless for the rest of the day to make up
for it, and when Eleanor, with very red weeping eyes and a puffed face
found breath her first words were, "Isn't it perfectly splendid that I
have the whooping-cough, too?"

And Florence, between whoops, spluttered, "Splendid."

"This is the first time I ever knew it to be cause for congratulation,"
said Aunt Dora laughing. "Now, this is market day, so, I am going to
leave you to your own devices. I may be back before luncheon, and I may
not. Meantime, make yourselves perfectly at home. You can play in the
library or in Rock's room or anywhere, but in the parlor." Then she
left them.

"You must see my lovely new Ada; she is a darling. Aunt Dora gave her
to me, and she is such a comfort," said Eleanor. "I brought Celestine
too."

"And I brought Rubina," said Florence; "she has a new hat."

"I think we'd better play in the library," said Eleanor. "It has such
a nice bay window and we can have that for one house and the place
over by the mantel for the other house. It is so perfectly lovely to
see you again, Florence." And they, forthwith, proceeded to establish
themselves for a morning's play, chattering as fast as their tongues
could run, so that lunch time came before they were aware of it, and
then, after all, Aunt Dora did not come home, but sent some dainties
from the market and with their dolls they had luncheon at a small table
in the library.

[Illustration: "THEY HAD LUNCHEON IN THE LIBRARY"]

"Isn't it fine to have Rubina and Celestine together again?" said
Florence. "Did Bubbles take Floridy Alabamy away with her? Poor
Bubbles, I do hope your uncle will find her."

"I hope so too," returned Eleanor with a sigh. "Yes, she took her doll,
but she is such a forlorn looking creature; that horrid Donald got
hold of her one day and pretended she was a witch and must be burned at
the stake. Bubbles found it out just in time to save her, but her hair
was singed off, and she has to wear a cap all the time."

"Aren't boys horrid?" said Florence in a disgusted tone.

"Some boys," returned Eleanor; "Rock isn't."

"No, he isn't, but Dimple, I should think you would be glad to leave
that Cousin Ellen family. Sister says she doesn't think that relations
are a bit nice."

"Why, Florence, we are relations."

"Yes, I know. I don't suppose she means that none of them are nice. I
think she means that they are so likely to think they can pick you to
pieces and find fault with you just because they are relations. Most of
mine are that way. You know Cousin Ellen is my mamma's cousin, too, and
I never did like to see her when she used to come to our house."

"Oh, well," said Eleanor with a satisfied sigh, "we don't have to think
about her any more."

Nevertheless, she did much thinking on account of Cousin Ellen and her
family, that very evening. Just after dinner her Aunt Dora said: "We
must make out our shopping lists, Dimple, for we are going to start out
early to-morrow."

"Let me see your purse, Dimple," said Uncle Heath, looking up from his
evening paper.

Eleanor obediently went upstairs and brought down her little netted
purse; it had in it one dollar and two quarters.

"How many Christmas gifts do you expect this to buy?" asked Uncle Heath
smiling.

"Why, let me see;" Eleanor began to count on her fingers; "mamma, one,
and papa, two; you and Aunt Dora and Rock and Florence and Bubbles, I
should like to get Bubbles a new doll, and I do want so much to send
just a little something to Mrs. Snyder. Then I should like something
for Miss Reese and I always give Sylvy a present. How many does that
make? Ten, I believe."

Her uncle chinked her coins in his hand, and looked at his wife with a
smile. "Then, you will have just fifteen cents apiece. I'm afraid you
cannot buy very magnificent things with that amount."

"And how about your cousins, the Murdochs?" asked Mrs. Dallas quietly.
"They will have no papa to buy them gifts this year, and I am afraid
it will be rather a sad Christmas for them." Eleanor's speaking face
clouded, and she gave a long sigh, before she said, "I don't love them
very much, Aunt Dora, but--Uncle Heath, must I give them Christmas
gifts? That would make five more, you know, and--no, I don't love them
enough."

"Suppose, instead of being merely ill and away from you, your papa
should be gone from this earth, and that, in consequence, the lovely
Christmas you always have had should be a very sad one this year."

"Yes, I know," replied Eleanor thoughtfully, "but I'd have you and
Uncle Heath and Aunt Nellie and all of them to give me Christmas gifts."

Her uncle laughed. "Her wounds are too recent for her to be worked
upon in any such way, Dora. How much money did you say you had in your
purse, Dimple?"

"A silver dollar and two quarters."

Her uncle handed the small purse back to her. "Look again; I'm afraid
you don't know how to count."

Eleanor emptied the purse into her lap, and lo! instead of only one
dollar there were five. She gave a scream of delight. "Oh, Uncle Heath,
how dear you are. Do you truly mean this all for me?"

"What a question. What is in your purse is yours, isn't it? I told you
that you didn't know how to count." And this was all the satisfaction
she could get from him, although there was no doubt that Uncle Heath
had slipped in the extra dollars.

"Now, I can get a doll for Bubbles, for we must find her," she said.
"Now I shall have fifty cents instead of fifteen; no, I shall have more
than that." She fingered the money absently. "Aunt Dora," she said
after a pause, "I will get something for Cousin Ellen and all of them.
To be sure they were not very nice to me, but I said hateful things,
too, and I'd feel better about it if I were to send them something.
I could spend twenty-five cents on each of them, you know, and, even
then, I'd have more than I thought I should have for every one else."

Her Aunt Dora smiled. "What did I tell you, Heath? Well, dear, I think
that will be a very good plan, and I am sure that we can find some very
pretty little gifts to-morrow, perhaps for even less than twenty-five
cents. Now, I tell you what I should do: I should spend the most, as
you ought to do, upon your father and mother, and then get Bubbles her
doll. After that we can spend the rest of the money upon the remaining
persons."

This suited Eleanor exactly, and she said so. But just at this moment
came a ring at the door and a telegram was handed to Mr. Dallas. He
read it and looked up brightly at Eleanor. "Bubbles is found," he said;
"she is at the hospital from which I have just received this telegram.
I left word at each one of them that I was to be informed if a child
of her description should come in. It seems she is not in a very bad
state, but has a broken arm."

"Oh," Eleanor clasped her hands, "dear Uncle Heath, can we go get her
right away?"

"Why, no, I'm afraid not."

Eleanor looked disappointed. "Why not?"

"First, because it is after visiting hours, and second, because a
little girl with the whooping-cough would hardly be admitted into the
ward of a hospital."

"Oh, I forgot that."

"She will be well taken care of, dear," said Aunt Dora. "I am very glad
she is in so safe a place. To-morrow, before we do any of our shopping,
we will stop at the hospital and learn how she is. It is much better to
allow her to remain there till she is able to be moved safely, than to
try to take her away now. You know we cannot tell yet just how she may
be."

Eleanor agreed that it was best to wait. "But I hope she will be well
by Christmas," she said.

As it proved, Bubbles was not in so desperately bad a condition. She
had, indeed, been with the gipsies, some of whom she met as she was
trudging along toward Sylvy's, after having missed seeing Mr. Snyder.
The bright wagons and gay dresses attracted her and she lingered by
the way to watch this troupe of wandering people. One of the men was
training a restive young horse which came dashing down the road, and as
Bubbles tried to get out of the way, she was struck by another horse
which had become excited and had broken loose. A broken arm and some
bruises were the result for Bubbles. It was at first feared that she
might be injured internally, but after a week's nursing, it was found
that she was not, and a portion of the encampment having been started
on ahead, Bubbles was sent with them that she might sooner reach the
city and be placed in a hospital where she could receive attention and
communicate with her friends. She had sent word by one of the gipsy
boys to Sylvy of her whereabouts but the message failed of delivery.

The two little girls waiting outside in the carriage while Mrs. Dallas
made her call, greeted her eagerly, when she came out, and listened
with the greatest interest to the report, asking all manner of
questions. "Wasn't she glad to see you? Is she very sick? What is the
matter besides the broken arm? Did the gipsies take her there? How long
has she got to stay?" The questions came tumbling over one another till
Mrs. Dallas declared she did not know which to answer.

"One at a time," she said laughing. "She was perfectly delighted to see
me, poor little soul; she looks quite weak and miserable but she will
have every care. I saw the head nurse, and she told me that Bubbles is
in no danger. She has a broken arm and had a big lump on her head which
made her delirious for several days. The gipsies were very kind to her
and took her to the hospital. She will probably be out in a couple of
weeks."

"By Christmas?" Eleanor asked.

"Yes, I hope so, at least, if she improves as they think she will. She
sent her love to you and Florence, and she said that one of the gipsy
children had stolen her doll, so we shall get her one to-day, instead
of waiting to give it to her at Christmas. I think she would rather
have that than anything else. She is perfectly content, now that she
knows we are near her, and that she is to come to our house as soon as
she is able. I promised that I would go to see her as often as I could."

Eleanor gave a deep sigh. "I'm so thankful," she said. "Poor little
Bubbles." The child was not looking very bright, and Mrs. Dallas
concluded that the shopping expedition should be very short that day.

They did their shopping in rather a funny way, for Aunt Dora thought
it was not best for them to go into the shops themselves, and so, she
selected the articles and brought them out to the carriage that Eleanor
might approve them before they were sent home. Of course in every case
she was entirely satisfied, and when they came to Florence's present
that young person turned her head and shut her eyes tight that she
might not get even a glimpse of the game that Aunt Dora had selected.
But when it came to the present for Aunt Dora here was a quandary,
till Aunt Dora suggested that they should stop before the shop where
the purchase was to be made and she would send a salesman out to wait
upon them while she went on to another shop where they could call for
her. This plan worked very well and a pretty little candlestick for
her writing desk was carefully placed among the packages in the small
basket which was provided for the articles which they were to take home
themselves.

The first purchase was the doll for Bubbles, and Florence suggested
that it should be as much like Eleanor as possible, therefore, a fair
creature with light flowing locks and blue eyes was chosen.

For her father, "a book which will make him laugh," Eleanor decided
upon. "And for my blessed mamma something very lovely," and after
looking at many things, a very dainty, fluffy tie was chosen because
Aunt Dora said it would be easy to send it by mail. The rest of the
purchases were put off till another time, and the next morning after
the doll had been left at the hospital for Bubbles they continued their
shopping, getting a game for Rock, a cup and saucer for Uncle Heath,
a bright necktie for Sylvy, a pretty booklet for Miss Reese, and a
comical little match-safe for Mrs. Snyder, "so she will think of me
every time she lights her lamp," Eleanor said. After this, the Murdoch
family had to be disposed of, and this took the rest of the morning,
so that Eleanor returned home with an empty purse but with a well
satisfied feeling at having provided for every one.

The next day was to be spent with Florence, and when Eleanor put her
head on her pillow that night, although she was a very tired little
girl she had before her a pleasant anticipation and no regrets. Her
last thought before going to sleep was, "I am glad I got something for
Cousin Ellen and the children," and she fell asleep at peace with the
whole world.

When she awoke the next morning the ground was covered with snow
and her aunt met her with: "I wonder if it is prudent to send the
whooping-cough out of doors to-day. A fresh snow is liable to give
fresh cold. Shall you be much disappointed, Dimple, if I ask you to
stay at home to-day?"

"I did want to go so much," she said wistfully.

"I know you did, but although it is not very far to Florence's house,
the cars will not take you there, and even if they did, I should not
want you to go that way. You would best stay at home, I think, and we
can make a new dress and a hat for Bubbles' doll."

At this Eleanor's face brightened and when Uncle Heath volunteered to
stop at Mr. Graham's and ask if Florence could come and spend the day
with Eleanor, if an opportunity occurred to send her around, Eleanor
was quite satisfied. "I am glad Aunt Nellie has a carriage," she said,
"for Florence will be so much more likely to come. I think it was
very nice for Aunt Nell to let us go shopping in the carriage, for I
couldn't have gone at all any other way."

About noon the jingle of sleigh-bells announced the approach of a
sleigh, and looking out of the window there Eleanor saw Florence and
her eldest sister. Florence was seen to hop out and then the sleigh
drove off. Eleanor ran down into the hall to greet her cousin. "Hurry,
Florence," she said. "I am so glad you came. We are dressing Bubbles'
doll, at least, we are making a new dress for her, and a hat and coat.
Come right upstairs."

"I can stay till three o'clock," Florence told her, "and then mamma
will stop for me, and she wants you to go for a little ride in the
sleigh. Should you like to?"

"Of course," Eleanor answered. "I was just wishing that I could go when
I heard your bells jingling. Dr. Sullivan sometimes takes me with him
at home, but not very often."

"We don't often have sleighing," returned Florence. "At least, not to
last very long. I am glad we have some while you are here. Oh, Dimple,
there are so many mysteries at home; I can hardly wait till Christmas.
We are going to have a tree. Are you?"

"Yes, Aunt Dora says she is glad to have the excuse to have one; it
seems so much more Christmassy."

They spent the next hour or two in helping to make the doll clothes,
or, at least, they thought they were helping, though it must be
confessed that Aunt Dora did most of the work. At three o'clock the
sleigh came jingling up, and they had a fine drive out through the park
and Eleanor came home with more color in her cheeks than they had worn
for some weeks.




                             _CHAPTER IX_

                            _At Christmas_


The next day Eleanor was able to go over to her Aunt Nellie's, for
the sun was shining brightly, and the pavements were cleared of snow.
Florence and her other cousins greeted her warmly. They were all much
excited over the approach of Christmas, and Eleanor was piloted up
to the nursery, "Because," said Florence, "there is so much going on
downstairs, and some of sister's friends will be down in our room.
Mamma has gone out, but she will be back directly." And they proceeded
to establish themselves and set to work industriously to finish some
embroidery which each had to have ready for Christmas. They had hardly
begun to work, however, when Mrs. Graham appeared, and Eleanor scurried
her bit of linen out of sight, but Florence arose to the occasion with:
"Mamma, Dimple and I have been talking about the Christmas party that
we always have. We were wondering how we could manage it this year
when we all have the whooping-cough. We have a lovely plan, though."

"Have you?" said her mother, sitting down and drawing off her gloves.
"Let us hear it."

"Why," answered Florence, looking very wise as she threaded her needle,
"we think it would be nice to have a whooping party."

Her mother laughed. "That's a queer sort of party. Do you mean to play
Indian?"

"No, I mean we can have all the little girls and boys that are having
the whooping-cough and that can't go to school or anywhere."

"And how many do you suppose that will be?"

"I don't know. I know four or five. May we have it, mamma?"

"Why, I don't know. I shall have to think about it. I suppose I should
have to furnish lozenges and cough syrup for refreshments."

Florence laughed; it struck her as a very funny sort of refreshment,
but she knew her mother was joking, although she added quite seriously,
"We should have to be careful not to have anything very rich, you
know. I think, after all, you'd best think of something else, for, a
room full of children whooping and choking one after another, would be
rather an unpleasant scene. Don't you think something else would be
more amusing? You and Dimple put your thinking-caps on and we'll see
what can be done to amuse you during the holidays."

Florence agreed to this and the two little girls proceeded with their
work while they tried to think very hard, looking very sober as they
stitched away. They were interrupted by the entrance of Florence's
little sister Gertrude, who had been down town with her mother and who
came in full of importance at having had presents provided for her to
bestow at Christmas. "I've got sumpsin for ev'ybody," she said, "but
I'm not going to tell."

Florence hugged her up close to her. "Won't you tell me?" she asked
coaxingly.

"No," Gertrude shook her head, "I tan't tell."

"What color is the one you have for me?" Florence asked.

"It's white, an' it sumpsin to wipe your nose on. Now, I won't tell you
one sing more," and she pursed up her lips tight, looking very wise
while the others laughed heartily but pretended to be much mystified.
These were very mysterious times, anyhow. Some one was always skurrying
something under a chair or poking something into a closet whenever
certain persons entered the room, and there were unfamiliar snippings
of lace and silk and cambric to be seen on the floor in the nursery, so
that Florence was wrought up to a pitch of curiosity rather unusual for
her.

"You are to come over here right after breakfast, Christmas morning,"
she told Eleanor; "you and Rock. I wish you could stay here all night
so that we could hang up our stockings together. I do so wish you
could."

Eleanor looked a little doubtful; she did not want to neglect her Aunt
Dora and her Uncle Heath, not to mention Rock. "I am afraid I couldn't
do that," she said. "You know Rock will be at home and it would seem
mean to leave them all on Christmas morning."

"Rock could come too; it would be such fun to have you," continued
Florence, all hospitality, but Eleanor declared that would never do,
and so they had to give up the plan. But, after all, it did turn out
that Eleanor spent Christmas eve with her cousins, for Florence's
mother decided that the children should have their Christmas tree at
that time, that they might all go to Mrs. Heath Dallas' on Christmas
night and see the tree that was to be prepared for Rock and Eleanor.

"Aunt Dora won't tell me anything about the tree," Eleanor told
Florence, "so there's some sort of surprise, I know. Isn't it just fine
that we can all be here together? I should have been so miserable at
home."

"I don't see how you could have stood Cousin Ellen and have been nice
to her," said Florence.

Eleanor was silent for a moment and took several stitches in the doily
she was embroidering in outline stitch for her Aunt Nellie. "Well, I
wasn't very nice to her," she admitted after a time. "I meant to be in
the beginning, but when Don was so hateful and they treated Bubbles so
mean, I just didn't care and I said anything that came into my head.
Sometimes, when I got real mad, I was the sauciest girl you ever heard."

"Are you going to tell your mother?" Florence asked solemnly.

"I--I don't know. Maybe. Yes, I always tell mamma everything; somehow,
it comes out whether I want it to or not. Yes, I'll tell her, but I
couldn't be meek and lowly; I just couldn't. I never knew I could feel
so very, very mad at any one before, but, you see, now that I am not
there, I don't feel so mad, and I'm going to send the Christmas gifts,
you know. I'll tell you what I'll do: I'll write to Cousin Ellen, and
tell her I am sorry I was saucy, but I'll not say I am sorry about
Donald, for I'm not." And Florence agreed that she could hardly be
expected to.

The letter was written that very day and was tucked in the box with the
Christmas gifts. It ran:

    "DEAR COUSIN ELLEN:

    "I hope you will have a happy Christmas. I am having a lovely time,
    and Bubbles is getting along finely. Every one at the hospital
    likes her and she is just as nice as she was when mamma was at
    home. I thought you would be glad to know that she is not so much
    hurt as we were afraid of because you sent her away and you would
    feel very bad if you thought you had made her get hurt very bad.
    I send you all a little Christmas gift. I hope you will like what
    I send. Were you ever impudent when you were a little girl? I am
    sorry I was.

                                                                 "Yours
                                                      "ELEANOR DALLAS."

Eleanor submitted the letter to her Aunt Nellie who read it and
laughing, said: "You have said just the right thing, Dimple, and if
Cousin Ellen can remember as far back as a certain occasion when
she was a little girl I think she could answer, 'yes,' to your last
question."

"Was she a nice little girl? Did you know her then, Aunt Nellie?"

"Yes, I knew her very well. She was my cousin, you know, but I don't
believe your mother and I were as fond of her as you are of Florence.
She hasn't changed so very much, I fancy."

"Then she couldn't have been so very nice," Eleanor concluded.

It was the day upon which they expected Rock to return home, and
Eleanor was in a high state of excitement. There must be other arrivals
to be looked for, too, for Aunt Dora was having the largest guest room
made ready and one or two telegrams had arrived. "Are you expecting
somebody else?" she ventured to ask.

"Yes," Aunt Dora answered smiling.

Eleanor's wistful eyes asked the question before her lips said, "Not
papa and mamma?"

Aunt Dora stooped and kissed her. "No, dear, I wish I could say it
was they for whom I am looking, but I'll tell you this much: they are
strangers to me."

Eleanor puzzled over this. It seemed funny for Aunt Dora to entertain
strangers at Christmas time, and she was rather disappointed that it
should be so; it seemed as if it made a more formal day of it than she
could enjoy. She determined to ask Rock about it so soon as she should
have a chance, but he knew no more about it than she did and could not
coax the secret from his mother. Rock had grown, Eleanor discovered,
and although he was quite a rough and tumble boy, liking to be out
of doors and to play all sorts of games requiring muscle, he was as
kind and polite and gentle when he was in the house, as he ever had
been, and Eleanor did not feel that her old comrade had lost anything
by going to boarding-school. He was about a year older than Eleanor
and she had known him when his mother was a widow and before she had
married Eleanor's Uncle Heath.

"It's too bad that you can't go down town with me to buy my presents,"
Rock said to her the day he arrived. "But, I say, Dimple it's jolly to
have you here. I was so glad when I heard you were coming."

"You weren't as glad as I was," she returned. "And isn't it fine that
you don't have to go back to that hateful school?"

Rock looked sober. "Yes, it is," he replied. "Some of the fellows, who
have been to other schools say they aren't half bad, but you see, this
one has all new teachers this year, and though it used to be fine a few
years ago, it's not so any more. You see father thought it was the same
or he wouldn't have sent me there." One thing that Eleanor liked about
Rock was his loyalty to her Uncle Heath.

The days passed quickly enough and when Christmas eve came around
Eleanor, Rock, Mr. and Mrs. Heath Dallas were to see the tree at
Aunt Nellie's. A fine affair it was, and it made a great show in the
dining-room where it stood. Florence had several brothers and sisters
and it seemed a big family to Eleanor, for, first, there was Kitty,
the eldest daughter who was sixteen, and then came Marian, and next
Florence, who was not quite ten, and then the three younger children,
Lee and Gertrude, and Ted, the baby. This youngest member of the family
was not old enough to do much more than laugh and coo at the shining
tree, but Lee and Gertrude were just of the age to most appreciate the
glittering glories of stars and rings and balls and glistening baubles.

The presents were not to be given till the next morning, although
little Gertrude insisted upon making every one guess what she had for
him or her, and in most cases managed to convey the information as to
what it was. And then, because Rock said he was not going to hang up
his stocking because he was too big to do such babyish things, his
mother yielded to Florence's pleading for Eleanor's company for over
night, promising that she should not even be asked to stay to breakfast
if she could but be on hand to hang up her stocking with the rest.

"Don't you dare to stay too long," said Rock. "We're going to have our
presents right after breakfast, aren't you, mamma?"

Mrs. Dallas looked at her husband. "Unless you and Eleanor can wait
till evening when we have the tree."

"Oh, pshaw! that's too long to wait," Rock declared. Then seeing his
mother's expression, he asked, "Is there any particular reason for it,
mother?"

"Yes, I must confess, there is."

"Then I'll wait, if Dimple will, but it's a good deal to ask of a
fellow."

"I'll wait," said Dimple cheerfully.

"Then I'll come over for you some time after breakfast," Rock told her,
"and I'll see the presents over here and have the fun of that."

"I think Rock was just dear to do that," said Florence after he had
gone. "I did so want you to stay with me to-night. Come, let's go right
to bed, Dimple."

"We want to hang up our stockings first."

"Oh, of course. Mamma has some white ones, real big long ones, that she
keeps on purpose. You know every one of the family has a stocking on
Christmas morning."

"I am always going to hang up mine," Eleanor declared; "even after I
am grown up and am married. I hope we shall live near each other then,
don't you?"

Florence replied that she did and they hurried off to bed after seeing
the stockings securely hung up by the nursery chimney-piece.

Although they were so filled with excitement that they kept awake much
longer than usual, they dropped to sleep at last and awoke at the sound
of the man attending to the furnace in the cellar.

"It's morning," whispered Florence. "Get up, Dimple, we must go and get
our stockings, and then we'll come back to bed and look at them."

"It is so dark," said Eleanor, also in a whisper, "are you sure it is
morning?"

"Yes, I hear John at the furnace, so I know. Put something round you,
or you may get cold. Oh dear, I believe I am going to cough, and I
don't want to wake up Gertrude and sister and the others." She buried
her face in the pillow and managed to choke down the paroxysm to some
extent, and then they wrapped themselves up warmly and tiptoed through
the silent hall to the nursery where the row of stockings hung.

"Here is mine," said Florence in a whisper, after feeling around for a
moment, "and here is yours. Don't they feel lovely and bumpy? Let's fly
back with them before any one hears us." But this was not accomplished
for Lee's quick ears heard them and he scrambled out of bed and
downstairs he came to get his stocking. Then came more scrambling and
whispering and giggling till all the stockings were in the possession
of their rightful owners, and the owners then proceeded to snuggle back
beneath the covers to examine their treasures.

Florence and Eleanor found the usual supply of cakes and candies and
such things; away down in the toe they discovered a bright penny and
on top of each stuffed stocking was placed a pretty little doll about
three inches long. These were dressed in long clothes and wore, each, a
tiny cap and cloak.

"Aren't they precious little things," said Eleanor, to whom a doll
always appealed. "Florence, aren't you dying to know what other
presents you have?"

"Yes, I am puzzled, for in the corner of the nursery, where our
presents are always put, mamma has set up the largest screen, and so I
know there is something big behind it, but I can't guess whom it may be
for, and it is so lovely to think it may be for me."

Their curiosity in this direction was soon gratified, for it was really
later than it appeared to be, for it was a dark morning and breakfast
was announced before they were dressed. To be sure, it did not much
matter, for all the children, except Lee, were too excited to eat much,
and Mr. Graham said he supposed the contents of the stockings took the
place of breakfast.

"We didn't eat anything but two cakes and two pieces of candy,"
Florence declared. "Lee has eaten half of what he had." But that did
not prevent Lee from entirely enjoying his chicken and waffles, and
the girls at last insisted that they could not wait all day for him.
Therefore a procession was formed with Mr. Graham at the head, and they
marched upstairs to the nursery. The screen was swung to one side, and
there before the delighted eyes of Florence and Eleanor was displayed a
pretty little doll-house, completely furnished from top to bottom. It
had three rooms above and three below. In the parlor were a lady and a
gentleman doll. The lady was sitting down and held a little boy doll
in her lap. In the kitchen was a black cook who was immediately dubbed
Sylvy, by Florence.

"Dimple hasn't looked at her own presents yet," said Marian, too much
interested herself to see Florence's delight to look at her own gifts.

"Why, where are they?" Eleanor asked.

"There, before the door of the doll-house."

Eleanor looked eagerly around and true enough there stood a cunning
little coach, drawn by two prancing horses and inside sat another lady
and gentleman with their little son. "Aren't they dear?" cried Eleanor.
"Oh, Florence, did you ever dream of having anything so lovely? Such
cunning little people and to think we have the two families! can't we
have the loveliest times? Oh, Aunt Nellie, I think you are a darling to
do this for me. I never had a papa doll before and this one is so fine;
he has such a lovely moustache."

Kitty laughed. "If you knew what a time we had to get a gentleman the
proper size to fit the little house, you would not wonder that you have
never possessed such a rare creature."

"Now, I want to know just who gave everything," said Florence.

"Papa gave the house; mamma furnished it, and I gave the dolls and
dressed them, all but cook, and Marian gave that. Lee gave the little
piano; he wanted to have a hand in furnishing the house."

"I don't see how you all kept the secret so well; I never dreamed of
such a surprise," Florence acknowledged.

"Now, about mine," said Eleanor.

"Your coach is from mamma and the lady and gentleman from me," Kitty
told her. "You haven't seen papa's present, have you?"

"No, are there any more?" And Eleanor's heart was further warmed by the
gift of a set of books that she had long wanted.

The doll-house was so fascinating that when Rock arrived he could
scarcely persuade Eleanor to go back home with him, and, indeed, he was
so well pleased with the gift that he said he did not wonder the girls
did not want to leave it, and he offered to go tell his mother that
Eleanor was having such a good time that she would rather stay the rest
of the day if she might. Aunt Dora appreciated the situation and sent
word that she might remain, but to be sure to be back by five o'clock,
and even then Rock found it hard to persuade her that it was time to
go, and that if they didn't hurry they might miss something. Then
Eleanor at last tore herself away, leaving her gifts behind her.

"It seems queer not to go to church on Christmas day," she said as she
and Rock were on their way home. "Was the church very pretty?"

"Beautiful," Rock answered heartily, "and so was the music. It is too
bad that you had to stay away. You ought to have seen Bubbles with her
stocking. She was delighted, and she has hardly touched a thing in it
because she wants to show it to you."

"And to think," said Eleanor, "I had to stay away from her all
Christmas day. I don't believe it has ever happened before."

"She had a good time," Rock assured her, "she has had all the nice
things that were good for her, and she knows she is to see you very
soon."

"In a week, the doctor said, I did so hope she could come to-day." She
gave a little sigh, but Rock began to joke with her, and they reached
the corner before she knew it.




                              _CHAPTER X_

                          _A Happy New Year_


It was quite dark when they reached home, and Eleanor saw that even in
the large guest chamber there was a brilliant light. "Oh, the company
has come," she exclaimed.

"Pshaw!" said Rock, "they got here before us after all."

Eleanor held back a little as she heard voices in the parlor, but
before she could see who was there out came some one who picked her
up, and gave her a mighty hug. "Grandfather!" she exclaimed. "Oh,
grandfather! I didn't dream it was you. Why, you are not a stranger."

"Why, yes he is," Rock put in. "Mother and I never saw him in our lives
till to-day."

"Why, of course," said Eleanor, "I forgot that he was in Europe when
Uncle Heath was married. Oh, grandpa, did you bring grandma? and where
is she?"

"Upstairs; she'll be down directly."

"And did you come all the way from Birmingham to-day?"

"Not to-day, but we reached here to-day. I tried to get here yesterday
but we were detained just twelve hours beyond the time we expected and
so we came lagging along about sundown."

"It is such a lovely surprise," Eleanor repeated, snuggling up to him.
Then her grandma came in and there was another welcome to be given.

Then, and this was a surprise too, when Eleanor turned from her grandma
who should be standing in the doorway but Bubbles. Since she was
recovering rapidly the doctors thought she might be allowed to spend
Christmas away from the hospital, as Mrs. Dallas made it a special
request. "Oh, Bubbles, Bubbles, I am so glad to see you," Eleanor
cried. "Why, how long have you been here?"

"I come 'bout fo' o'clock. Miss Dora she come an' fetched me. I gwine
back to-morrer, but in a week I kin come away fo' good an' all."

"And do you feel well?"

"Yass, miss, tol'able. I ain't just quite well, but I mos'."

"But oh, suppose you haven't had whooping-cough."

"Miss Dora say I has. She tooken an' write to Sylvy an' Sylvy she say I
has it when I a baby."

"Oh, then, that is all right."

Then dinner was announced, and Eleanor who had already eaten her fill,
regretted that she had tried to crowd two Christmasses into one day,
but there was no help for it, a second dinner could not possibly be
eaten, and she could only nibble at the good things provided.

After dinner came the excitement of the second tree, which was dazzling
enough to satisfy any one, and then the presents were distributed,
such an array of them that Eleanor never remembered having so many.
Books, two new Jungle Books, and a set of Miss Alcott's works, besides
several other entertaining stories; a pretty set of furs, and many
other things. Bubbles was not forgotten by any one, and had a pile of
presents almost as big as Eleanor's. As for Rock, with his new wheel,
skates, a fine little kodak, and books in great number, he was very
happy.

"It has been such a lovely Christmas," said Eleanor, "and I did not
see how it could be, a month ago. Aunt Dora, isn't it strange what a
difference it makes whether people love you or not?" And these were the
last words any one heard from her that night, for, in five minutes she
was fast asleep.

The last night of the old year brought another joyful surprise for
Eleanor. Bubbles had that day arrived from the hospital, her arm still
in a sling, but she was otherwise quite herself. Aunt Dora assured her
that she should remain under her roof till Eleanor's parents should
return, and Bubbles, who was a grateful little soul, did her best to
show appreciation, constituting herself Miss Dora's special messenger.
"I was sassy, Miss Dora," she confessed; "'deed I was, but I ain't
sassy to folks 'at treats me good, an' I jus' run my legs off fo' yuh,
ef yuh wants me to."

"It's bad enough for you to have nearly run your arm off," returned
Mrs. Dallas smiling.

"It's great fun to have you and Bubbles here," Rock declared. "Aren't
we just going to have a warm old time?" And indeed, it was a happy
holiday week, for, although they were cut off from many outside
frolics, they could have plenty of fun at home, especially since
Grandpa and Grandma Dallas were always ready to add their share to
the amusements. It was grandpa, himself, who suggested the kind of
party which whooping-cough patients could have. Aunt Nellie agreed
heartily and sent out invitations to the hospital where Bubbles had
been, and all the children who were suffering from whooping-cough or
who had been through the ordeal and who could go out, were invited to
a Punch and Judy show the last day of the old year. Grandpa added to
the performance a magic-lantern show which gave great delight. It was a
funny sort of party, but the children all enjoyed it.

"We won't put on our very best frocks," said Florence, "because we
mustn't dress better than the company. We are going to have jelly and
little plain cakes for the refreshments and we're going to give a
little doll to each of the girls and a game to each of the boys, for
favors."

"I think that is a fine kind of party," said Rock. "I like it much
better than the other kind."

The guests all enjoyed themselves so heartily and spread such reports
among their friends that grandpa said it was too bad that other
children who were unable to leave the hospital, but who were well
enough to be entertained in a similar way, could not enjoy the little
show, therefore he and Rock decided to give their services to the
entertainment of these other children the next week, so Florence's
first idea brought abundant fruit.

It was late in the afternoon, after the little guests had departed that
Eleanor's surprise came. She and Rock and Florence were sitting before
the library fire when some one opened the door and a voice asked:
"Where is my daughter?"

"Here I am, mamma," Florence answered.

Then there was a little laugh and some one came forward in the dusk,
some one whose familiar form made Eleanor, as she turned her head,
spring to her feet. "It is my mamma! It is my mamma!" she cried,
flinging herself in the dear arms stretched out ready to clasp her.
And then who should walk into the room, quite erect, and without any
crutches at all, but Eleanor's papa.

"Oh, when did you come? When did you come?" cried the child, her voice
shaking with excitement.

"We have just arrived," her father told her. "We wanted much to be here
by Christmas, but it seemed better for me to stay longer and get the
full benefit of the baths."

"And are you quite well?" said his daughter.

"So nearly that I do not fear a return of the trouble. My little girl
has had a hard time, hasn't she?"

"I did at first, but I've had a lovely time here. Aunt Dora and Uncle
Heath are so good to me, and here at Aunt Nellie's it is next to being
at home. When are we going back, papa?"

"In a few days. You know I have a father and mother, too, whom I have
not seen for some time, and I want to have a little visit with them,
though, to be sure, we shall have them with us in the spring."

"Shall we? I am so glad, but I'm glad so much lately, that it isn't
anything new."

Then there was a great time deciding where every one should stay.
Florence said that Eleanor had been so long at her Aunt Dora's that she
ought to come to her other aunt's, and Rock insisted that Eleanor had
agreed to stay at his house till she went home, but finally Florence
carried the day, for she argued that Mrs. Heath Dallas would have all
the company, if her Aunt Florence went there, so Eleanor's parents
agreed that she should make Florence a little visit until they should
be ready to go home, and for a week the two little girls had a great
time playing with the new doll-house.

[Illustration: "THE TWO LITTLE GIRLS HAD GREAT TIMES PLAYING"]

Then came an arrangement which to Eleanor, particularly, was a most
delightful one. Since it would be some time before either of the two
little girls could go to school again, Eleanor's mother proposed that
Florence should go home with them and that they should have lessons
there. "For," said Mrs. Dallas, "what do you think, daughter? Miss
Reese has the whooping-cough; not very badly, but some one has to
take her place in the school. Now, don't you think it would be a good
plan to ask her to come for two or three hours a day to teach you and
Florence?"

"Fine," replied Eleanor.

"How should you like to take this boy, too?" asked Uncle Heath, putting
his hand on Rock's shoulder. "I find that I have to take another long
trip and I'd like to have Dora go with me, but we don't want to send
Rock back to boarding-school again, since he had such a sorry
experience the last time, but if you could take him in with your young
folks it would relieve our minds, besides being a good thing for him,
Miss Reese is a very competent teacher, I judge."

"She is an excellent teacher," his brother assured him. And the matter
was considered settled.

"Does Cousin Ellen know you are coming home, mamma?" Eleanor asked.

"Yes, she knows, and she has taken a little house on the other side of
town."

"Oh!" Eleanor's face was a sight to see, between her desire to seem
pleased and her real feeling of disappointment.

Her mother hugged her tightly and said: "Never mind Cousin Ellen, now
you have your mother."

Eleanor gave a great sigh of content and rested her head against her
mother's arm. "Dearest mamma, the next time you go away I shall get
into one of the trunks rather than be left behind. You don't know, you
never will know, how horrid Cousin Ellen can be."

"Don't I? Perhaps I do. At all events, my darling, she will not be
near enough to bother you."

"No, and now I am rather glad I am not to go back to school, for then
I should have to see Olive all the time, and she does try to set the
girls against me. Am I a very bad child, mamma?"

"You are not perfect, sweetheart, but I don't believe you are as
naughty as Cousin Ellen would have us think."

In a few days they started for home, a merry party, Eleanor, her father
and mother, Florence, Rock and Bubbles. As they came near the house
Eleanor glanced up at the window where poor Ada had hung so helplessly.
She looked over at the little playhouse, then she turned to Rock. "Oh,
Rock," she said, "I am so glad you are not Don."

Sylvy, smiling and neat, met them at the door, and before twenty-four
hours all was as it had been before Cousin Ellen had come. Yet, it took
Eleanor a little while to adjust herself to the belief that there were
no hard words nor cold looks to greet her, and once or twice she cried
out in the night so pitifully as to bring her mother to her side to
awaken her from a nightmare in which she said she thought Cousin Ellen
was holding her while Don stuck pins in her.

One of the first visitors was Dr. Sullivan, who greeted Eleanor with:
"Heigho, little girl! back again? Plenty of fresh air, remember.
Another patient is this, Miss Florence? A comrade in misery. Well, keep
out of doors all you can."

And then came Miss Reese for sympathy, as she said, and she seemed so
glad to see Eleanor that the child felt that here was one person, at
least, who believed in her. "I'm so glad you can come and teach us,
Miss Reese," she told her. "I think it will be a dear little school. We
are to study in the library, mamma says, and I think it will be great
fun."

Mrs. Dallas had just come in from a walk. "What do you think, daughter?
Cousin Ellen wants to know if I will let Don and Olive and Jessie join
our little class."

Eleanor looked horror-stricken and her mother laughed as she asked,
"What did you say, mamma?"

"I said no, and I said it very emphatically. Cousin Ellen says the
three older children have had the whooping-cough and she fears it for
none of them but Alma. I said: 'I do not think the arrangement would be
at all a satisfactory one, Cousin Ellen, and we will not consider it.'"

Just here Bubbles came in saying: "Miss Dimple, Mr. Snyder out hyah."

"Oh!" Eleanor jumped up. "Please 'scuse me, Miss Reese, I must see my
dear butterman. Come, Florence, come, Rock." And she ran out to greet
her old friend, who shook both her hands and said: "Mrs. Snyder heard
you was comin' home and she wants to know if you won't come out some
day with your cousins and the little colored girl. Some Saturday. If
you take the electric cars to Brookside it will be just a little walk
across the fields. Mrs. Snyder wants to hear all about what has been
happening and I've got a little colt to show you; one of the finest
in the land. Come next Saturday, if it ain't too cold," he said as he
drove away.

"They were so good to me, you will let us go, won't you, mamma?"
Eleanor asked when she went into her mother.

"Of course, dear, you may go. I am more than grateful to Mr. and Mrs.
Snyder for their kindness to you, and I would not refuse to have you
accept their invitation for anything."

"And you'll take butter from them again?"

"Most certainly. Now run along, Miss Reese and I have some matters we
want to talk over."

"I can't find the key to the playhouse," said Eleanor, coming back in a
minute.

"Can't you? Well, never mind, wait till to-morrow before you go there.
Suppose you get Bubbles to help you and Florence to put your clothing
neatly in the bureau drawers."

"And then shall we help Rock to put his away?"

"Yes."

But upon being consulted, Rock said, "I did that myself."

Eleanor looked at him admiringly and Florence said, "I didn't know boys
ever did such things; my brother doesn't."

"Because somebody does it for him, I suppose, but my mother says
there's no reason why a boy shouldn't be as smart as a girl about
finding things and keeping them in order."

"I wish my mother would say that to Lee," returned Florence; "he
always throws his things anywhere and we girls have to find them for
him and put them away."

"Well," said Rock, "I wouldn't let a girl do that for me."

Eleanor was sitting on the floor hugging her knees, her eyes roving
around the room. Presently she jumped up and began a frantic dance.
"What is the matter?" asked Florence in wonder.

"I'm glad, just so glad that I can't help it," Eleanor told her. "When
I think it is Rock and not Don who is in the little room, and that you
are here instead of Olive, I could scream with joy."

"We haven't been to the playhouse yet," said Florence.

"No, mamma said to wait till to-morrow."

"Why?"

"I don't know. She just said so. I don't suppose there is any reason."

"I believe there is," said Florence mysteriously.

"Oh, why?"

"Because I saw your papa come out of there with a man."

"Oh, well, we'll see to-morrow. I'm not going to guess about it. Let us
go downstairs. There comes Doctor Sullivan again, oh, and Miss Reese is
going. She will be here to-morrow to begin lessons. Doctor Sullivan is
not coming in. Miss Reese is going with him in the buggy."

The next day did solve the mystery of the playhouse, for it appeared
that the place had been repaired and put in perfect order. The man,
whom Florence saw, had been putting in a pane of glass which Don had
broken. "It looks nicer than ever," said Eleanor admiringly. "I am so
glad papa had it made so new and clean, I feel as if all the Don of it
were gone now." The words were hardly out of her mouth before Don's
form appeared in the doorway. Eleanor drew herself up stiffly. "Well?"
she said.

Don looked rather sheepish, but he said: "I just thought I would come
over."

Eleanor said nothing.

"Say, I left my knife out here," began Don.

"When?"

"Oh, a long time ago. I want to come in and look for it."

"You can't come in. I will look for it. I don't believe it is here
though, for it's been ever and ever so long since you were in here."

"I don't care, I'm coming in. I'd like to see any girl keep me out."

At this Rock came forward. He had been sitting in a corner where Don
could not see him. "Then perhaps, a boy can keep you out," he said
calmly. "This is Eleanor's house and she has a right to do as she
chooses about it. If you have left anything here, go up to the house
and tell Mrs. Dallas, or Mr. Dallas either. They will see that you get
it."

Don stood for a moment irresolute and then walked away, but a few
minutes later they heard a sharp cry of pain and they all rushed out to
see Bubbles sitting on the ground sobbing and holding her wounded arm.

"Oh, Bubbles, Bubbles," cried Eleanor, running up to her, "what is it?"

"Dat Don he come an' gimme a lick 'fore I knowed he was anywhere about,
and he knocked me over and hurt mah arm, he did."

Rock's eyes snapped. "I'll get even with him," he muttered, "the little
bully."

"Does your arm hurt you very much?" asked Florence anxiously. "Come,
let's go to the doctor right away."

"We'll tell mamma first," said Eleanor. This done, Mrs. Dallas did
decide that the doctor would best be seen and they set out at once for
his office, fortunately finding him at home. He found nothing serious
had happened, but he frowned when told of the sudden and uncalled-for
attack upon Bubbles, and shook his head, looking sharply at Rock as if
he might be suspected of being at fault in the matter, so that Eleanor
spoke up and said, "Rock sent him off, doctor, and I suppose that's
what made him mad. Uncle Heath said he didn't think that Don was really
a bad boy, but I think he is a very bad boy."

The doctor smiled at her emphatic way of speaking and said that he
would call in the morning and see if Bubbles were all right. Indeed,
it seemed that he generally found his way to the house every day, and
about the time that Miss Reese took her leave after lesson hours.

Saturday proved to be as fine a day as could be expected in January,
and the four children, Bubbles included, started for Mr. Snyder's.
Florence and Rock had never been there before, and were delighted to
go whizzing along through the country which was really very beautiful,
even in winter, for it is not alone when trees are green, that hills
and dales are fair to see.

They had been traveling for some time when Eleanor said, "You told the
conductor to let us off at Brookside, didn't you, Rock? That place we
just passed looked like it, but I am not sure if it is the place."

"I told him," returned Rock, "but maybe he forgot. I'll ask him." This
he did to find that they had passed the place and were told that it
wasn't very far and they could walk back.

"I call that pretty cool," said Rock as they scrambled down from the
car, "but we've got to make the best of it, I suppose."

They trudged along for a little distance when suddenly they came to a
high trestle before which Eleanor stood aghast. "I never can go over
that," she declared.

"Oh, yes, you can," said Rock. "I'll walk ahead and take your two
hands," but Eleanor shrank from such a proceeding.

"I couldn't! I couldn't," she insisted, "it makes me sick to think of
it, and then suppose a car should come along."

"No, they only come every half hour, and it is a single track so the
down car doesn't start till the up car gets to the terminus, the
conductor told me, so that's all right," Rock tried to reassure her by
saying.

But Eleanor was firm and at last clambered down the embankment and
discovered a place narrow enough for her to cross the little stream
running below. Bubbles fearfully followed, and they managed to scramble
up the bank, reaching the other side almost as soon as Rock and
Florence. But this was not the end of their adventures.




                             _CHAPTER XI_

                           _Don and a Pony_


The day was unusually pleasant for the season, and the children as they
journeyed along saw that they were not the only ones who had sought the
country. Ahead of them were three boys who were going in the direction
of Mr. Snyder's.

"One of those boys looks like Don," said Florence; "I wonder what he is
doing out here. Do you know who the others are, Dimple?"

"No, I don't believe I do, though one of them looks like Joe Forrester."

"Is he the brother of the girl you told me about?"

"Yes, but I don't know him. See, they are turning off here and that is
Mr. Snyder's house over there."

"I hope those boys aren't going there."

"I don't believe they are; the boys from town go wandering all about in
the woods and places about here. I don't believe Don would want to go
to Mr. Snyder's."

But in this she was mistaken, for, after they had spent a pleasant hour
with Mrs. Snyder and had eaten a hearty and good dinner, they heard a
great commotion outside whither Mr. Snyder had gone to bring up his
pretty little colt to show the children.

"Mr. Snyder thinks as much of that colt as if it were a baby," Mrs.
Snyder told them, "and it is a pretty creature. The land's sake! What's
all that to do?"

They all ran out on the porch to see Mr. Snyder with a squirming boy
firmly held by the collar, while Lem was leading off the colt which was
limping and seemed in some way hurt.

"Ben, Ben, what's the matter?" cried Mrs. Snyder running down the steps.

"Matter enough," he answered, "just wait till I get this youngster
settled and I'll tell you."

The children peeping over the balustrade of the porch, saw a very
wrathful countenance, yet Eleanor's sympathies were about to go out to
the captured boy when suddenly she exclaimed: "Oh, Florence! Oh, Rock!
It is Don."

Sure enough, Don it was, and the angry man who held him prisoner
brought the boy up on the porch saying: "Here's a fine fellow for you.
He'll cost me a pretty penny, but I'll make him suffer."

"Why, Ben, what has he done?" inquired Mrs. Snyder.

"Done? Done enough. Him and a couple of other rascals that's got away,
worse luck, have come near ruining my colt and have played havoc with
your frames out there, mother."

"Not my violet frames?"

"Yes, that's right. You see, I let Dandy out into the back lot for a
run, seeing that it was such a fine day, and them fellows thought it
would be great fun to scare him to see him run, so they crept under the
fence and shied something at him, and he ran and jumped the fence, or
tried to, for he caught himself on that wire fence by the garden and
after struggling a while he got loose and went crashing through the
frames. I don't know how bad the colt's hurt, but I know how bad the
boy's going to be." He gave Don a shake and the boy, white with terror,
began to beg for mercy.

For all the wrongs she had suffered at Don's hands were still fresh in
Eleanor's memory, she began to feel very sorry for the culprit, and she
said softly, "Maybe it wasn't Don that did it, Mr. Snyder. Maybe it was
one of the other boys, the ones who ran away."

"Don? Is that this fellow's name? Do you know him?"

"Why, yes, he is Donald Murdoch. Don't you remember Cousin Ellen
Murdoch, who lived in our house? He is her son."

"Yes, yes," Mr. Snyder slightly loosened his grip upon Donald and
appeared to be considering the matter. After a moment's pause he spoke
again. "This is the youngster then, who caused you so much trouble I
suppose."

"Ye-es," Eleanor answered reluctantly.

"Pestered the little darky so she had to leave and was the cause of her
getting a broken arm?" He gave Donald a shake that made the boy's teeth
chatter.

"Yes," spoke up Florence, for Eleanor was silent, "and he tried to hurt
Bubbles again just a day or two ago." Mr. Snyder's grip on the boy's
shoulder made the boy wince.

"Told lies about you; took your playhouse and helped himself to
anything he wanted without so much as a 'by your leave,' didn't he?"
Mr. Snyder kept up his remarks to Eleanor.

"Oh, yes," Eleanor found her voice again, "but his mother would feel so
dreadfully about it if you send him to jail."

Mr. Snyder's face relaxed some of its grimness. "Come in here, all of
you," he said, "and we'll have a little trial by jury. Here, boy, stand
there. Don't you dare to budge one inch or it will be the worse for
you. You and your companions have trespassed on my property, and have
injured a valuable colt for me besides doing other damage. I am going
to sift the matter to the very bottom, and if you don't tell the truth
you'll get such a whipping as you never had. Now, sir, speak up; let's
hear your story. Did you or didn't you throw stones at the colt?"

Don glanced around. He saw a set of stern faces, only in Eleanor's eyes
was a pitying look. He began to cry softly and she took a step forward
but Mr. Snyder waved her back. "Wait a minute. Tell me, boy, did you
throw the stone that hit the colt?"

"The other fellows did, too," replied Don.

"Never mind about them. We'll settle their hash later on. I am dealing
with you now. Did you?"

"Yes," Don admitted reluctantly.

"Well then, you are liable to one-third damages, supposing the others
are equally guilty."

"Oh," Eleanor exclaimed, "Mr. Snyder, will it be a great deal?"

"A matter of fifty dollars without the colt; if he's not seriously
hurt, but I'm afraid that, at the best, he is so scratched that he
wouldn't bring the price I might have got for him. Now then, boy, I'm
inclined to trounce you well. You need a whipping the worst kind."

Donald cried woefully, and Eleanor looked ready to cry, herself. "Oh,
please, Mr. Snyder," she began.

He looked at her and smiled. "Then, Don, down on your knees and beg
this young lady's pardon for treating her like a cub. Here before us
all, down with you."

Donald did not hesitate, but began to mumble something. "Oh, no, no,
please," Eleanor interrupted him, feeling the shame of it tingling to
her very ears. "Never mind, now, Mr. Snyder. I don't care. It is all
over and past and, please, never mind."

"All right. Get up, boy, you've Dimple to thank for being let off from
a thrashing, but I'll march you to your mother and you will tell a
straight story before her or I'll know the reason why." And Donald,
cowed and miserable, was taken directly back to town, and was marched
into his mother's presence.

Mr. Snyder told his tale curtly. "I've plenty of witnesses," he said,
"and I know what I'm talking about. I've got to have this made right or
I'll go to law about it."

"I am sure my boy never had a hand in it," returned Mrs. Murdoch
stiffly.

"Your boy did, by his own confession. Here, sir, tell your mother all
about it." And Mrs. Murdoch was an unwilling listener to an account of
the disaster.

"I never would have believed it," she said in a distressed tone, "but
Mr. Snyder, I am sure he didn't mean to hurt your horse, and besides
those other boys led him on, I am sure."

"He threw the first stone and he was the ring-leader," persisted Mr.
Snyder. "I've three witnesses to prove it."

"I know who they are," said Don, feeling safe under the shelter of his
mother's wing; "it was Florence and Eleanor and that boy they call
Rock."

"Oh," Mrs. Murdoch said significantly, "if they were concerned in it,
the whole tale is probably a fabrication."

"Which it isn't," Mr. Snyder declared. "They never one of them saw it,
all of them being in my house behind closed doors when it happened.
The ones who saw it were two of my neighbors and my man, Lem Hawkins
who shouted to them to stop and couldn't get there in time to prevent
mischief. Ain't you a pretty sneaking little cur?" he said turning
to Don. "I'd like to know who it was that begged you off. Tell your
mother how it comes that you escaped a sound whipping. And that brings
up another thing, ma'am. My wife and I are mighty fond of that little
gal, Dimple Dallas, and we don't mean to stand by and have her blamed
for others' bad actions. Just out with it, boy, and tell your mother
how you plagued the life out of her and that little Bubbles, and don't
forget to put in how she begged you off to-day. No shirking; a plain,
straightforward story." He shook his head in a terrifying manner at
Don who spluttered and stammered out a confession which satisfied his
stern judge, but which his mother would fain have had left unsaid, for
finally she stopped him with "That will do, Donald. I am sure you had
some provocation. I don't excuse you altogether, of course, but there
are always two sides to a question."

"Just so," said Mr. Snyder, "and it won't be my fault if every one
doesn't hear both. Now, ma'am, are you ready to pay me twenty dollars
for the damage this boy has caused? I'm letting you off easy at that."

Mrs. Murdoch looked aghast. "Pay twenty dollars! Why, I couldn't think
of it. I am in very straitened circumstances, and oh, Mr. Snyder, you
surely will not press such a claim for a mere piece of fun. Boys will
be boys."

"And law's law. I'm going to have that made good."

"You'll not go to law about it."

"Perhaps."

Mrs. Murdoch was so evidently distressed that finally Mr. Snyder who
was too good-hearted to insist upon ready money, made a proposition
that Donald should work out the amount. "I have a pretty good patch of
berries every year," he said, "and I always have to hire a few pickers.
Now, I'll be easy with you, but it is only right that the boy should
be made to do something about this, and I shall expect him to work out
every dollar." This arrangement was finally agreed upon, for Donald
thought he would rather enjoy a free time among the strawberry beds,
and he was so relieved at getting off thus easily that he was ready
to give Eleanor credit for all her influence in his behalf. So that
Mrs. Murdoch began to think that, after all, she might have misjudged
Eleanor.

This was the end of any trouble with Don, so far as Eleanor was
concerned, and indeed, so far as it affected others, for he needed just
such a lesson and after many days of wearisome, back-breaking work
among the strawberry beds, work which Mr. Snyder made in no way easy
for him, he realized that one must respect the property of others, and
that in this world a person cannot be allowed his own way without
regard to the rights of others.

But the rest of the winter passed happily enough. In the spring came
Grandpa and Grandma Dallas, and thinking that his little granddaughter
looked rather thin and pale, grandpa consulted his son with the result
that Eleanor was told that her grandfather meant to buy her a little
Shetland pony that she might spend the greater part of her time out in
the fresh air without getting too tired.

"Do you hear? Oh, Rock! Oh, Florence, do you hear?" cried Eleanor, upon
being told the news. "Oh, grandpa, when will you get it?"

"As soon as we can find one that is gentle and well-trained," he
answered smiling. "Do you know of any one who has such a pony for sale?"

"No, not now. I did know a darling of a pony; it was Zula's, that
little gipsy girl's. Oh, if the gipsies were here, perhaps they would
have one to sell. They had one and Zula wanted me to buy it."

"I am afraid they would be rather unreliable people to buy from," her
grandfather said.

"Oh, but they are really not so bad. Zula loved her brother dearly and
her pony too, and they were very good to Bubbles."

"Oh, yes, Bubbles, to be sure. Bring her in and let us hear what she
has to say of them. Perhaps they will be coming this way after a while
and we can see what they have to sell. It must be about time for them
to be getting up this way from the south."

"Yass, suh, dey fust-rate to me," said Bubbles, upon being questioned.
"Dey had a mess o' hosses, an' a teenty little pony like de one Miss
Dimple tell you-all about. Hit were a good one, too, 'cause I heered
dat Marco, dey call him, when he fetch de pony in, an' he say to de
little gal: 'I got a pony mos' as good as yo'n,' an' she say she don't
believe it, an' he say 'sho.'"

"Well," said grandpa, "I'll look about and see what we can find, and if
the gipsies come this way we'll hunt them up, and find out what they
have."

It was lovely weather and the children had all so far recovered from
their illness as to be able to return to school, since Miss Reese, too,
was to take her place there after the Easter holidays. "I hope Miss
Reese will stay," said Eleanor, "for I love her, mamma. Do you think
she will teach at that school as long as I go there?"

"I'm afraid not."

"Why?"

"I don't think Dr. Sullivan will let her."

"Dr. Sullivan?" Eleanor looked puzzled, but presently it dawned upon
her what her mother meant. "Oh, mamma, is that why he used to come
every day about noon to take Miss Reese home? I thought how kind he
was," she said in an aggrieved tone.

"Well, wasn't he kind?"

"Yes, to himself."

Mrs. Dallas laughed and said she must tell the doctor and Miss Reese
that.

"Do you think Aunt Nellie will want Florence to come home after Easter?"

"No, I think she will be very glad to have her remain where she can be
out of doors more than she could be in the city."

"And can she stay all summer?"

"Yes, if her mother doesn't find that she cannot be parted so long from
her. You know you and I wanted to see each other very much after a two
months' separation."

"Yes, but Aunt Nellie has such a lot of other children and you had only
me."

"Yes, but Florence has but one mamma, you know."

"I hadn't thought of that," Eleanor returned. "Well, Florence can go
home and stay a week and then come back again. Can't she do that?"

"Perhaps so."

Just then Florence came in with her doll Rubina in her arms. "Hurry
up, Dimple," she said. "Get your hat; your grandpa is going to take us
out to drive. The gipsies have come and are camping in the same place
Bubbles says."

"Oh, I am so glad. Are you going to take Rubina?"

"Yes."

"Then I'll take Celestine. Ada, my dear, you must stay at home, for
Celestine and Rubina are such friends, you know. Mamma, may Ada sit in
your room with you? I am afraid she will get lonely without me."

"I shall be very pleased to have her company," Mrs. Dallas replied. "I
have noticed that she is an extremely well-behaved child and never
meddles with my things when you leave her in my room."

"Is grandpa here? Is the carriage waiting?" Eleanor asked Florence.

"No, not yet. Your grandpa and Rock have gone to get it."

"Oh, then we will have time to change the dolls' dresses. I want Zula
to see them looking their best. What can I take Zula, mamma?"

"Are you sure you will see her?"

"Why yes, I suppose she is with these gipsies."

"Perhaps it is not the same company."

"Oh, well, I'll take something anyway. May I have some daffodils out of
the garden? I can give them to some one else if Zula is not there."

"You may have some of them."

"Rock is going to take his camera and see if he can get some snap-shots
of the gipsies," Florence told them.

"Won't that be fine? Good-bye dearest, loveliest mamma. I wish you were
going too."

"I couldn't very well go this morning. I have several things to attend
to at home."

Over the same way that Eleanor had traveled with weary feet that
November day, they went this fair morning in April, and it was not long
before they saw ahead of them the gaily painted wagons of the gipsies.
"There they are!" cried Florence. "Can we drive up real close? I never
saw a gipsy camp before. I think the people look very queer."

"I shouldn't mind traveling around the country in a wagon like that,"
Rock declared, as he caught sight of the odd little houses on wheels.

"Now we are going to stop," said Eleanor. "Grandpa, will you ask if
Zula is here. I want to see her."

But grandpa was attracted by the sight of a little pony under a tree.
He nodded to one of the men lounging near, and asked him: "Is that pony
for sale?"

The man looked around uncertainly. "Marco is boss. I'll tell him," he
said; and a grave-faced young man soon came up to the carriage.

"I'm inquiring about that little pony," said grandpa. "Is he for sale?"

"No, I don't sell him. He belonged to my little sister. I don't take a
thousand dollars for him. My little sister's horse he was."

"Oh," Eleanor leaned forward. "Was it Zula's pony? Where is Zula?"

The young man looked down. "She has died this winter."

"Oh!" Eleanor drew back. "I wanted to see her. Are you Marco, her
brother?"

"Her brother," he replied. "Where have you known my little sister?"

"I saw her here last fall. Don't you remember? And the little colored
girl you took to the hospital? She is well now. You were very kind to
Bubbles. Won't you have these flowers? I brought them to Zula." And she
held out the yellow daffodils.

The young man took them. "Thank you. I am glad to see you. I would like
to sell you the pony if I could sell him to any one, but I cannot. He
was Zula's, but I have another one here as good. I sell him for one
hundred twenty-five dollars." He turned to Mr. Dallas.

"That is a pretty good price, but let us see him," said grandpa.

"I am so sorry that Zula is not here," said Eleanor softly, "but, you
know, she is up in heaven and she must be very happy."

The young man turned and looked at her. It seemed as if the tears were
very near his eyes as he walked away.

Presently he returned leading a little shaggy pony which he declared he
could recommend as being gentle and perfectly safe. "I would not wish
to sell to Zula's friend a pony not good," he said earnestly. "Is it
for the little girl here?"

"Yes, for her!" grandpa told him.

"He is one year older than the other, but he is perhaps no worse for
that, for he is easy in harness and very gentle to ride. If you like
him I sell him for one hundred and twenty dollars."

Mr. Dallas asked many questions, got out of the carriage, and examined
the docile little creature very carefully, and finally offered one
hundred dollars for the pony. "I will do this," said the young man.
"We are here for three or four days. I will bring you the pony this
evening, and you can keep him long enough to try him all you want, and
if he does not prove all I say you can return him, but if he does I
will sell him for one hundred and ten dollars."

This seemed so fair an offer that Mr. Dallas, at last accepted it, and
that evening the little pony arrived to remain as Eleanor's very own,
for he proved to be as tractable and good a little creature as could be
desired.




                             _CHAPTER XII_

                             _A May Party_


After the little pony was fairly established in his new home, Grandma
Dallas declared that she was not to be outdone by grandpa, and to make
the present quite complete she would add a pony-cart; and then three
merrier children could not be found than Eleanor, Florence, and Rock
as they drove out, the pony scampering unweariedly over many a mile.
It seemed no distance now to Mr. Snyder's and many a call did the good
butterman and his wife receive from the children.

But as the first of May approached an event was promised which
threatened to cast all other interests in the shade. Florence and
Eleanor had started to one school after Easter, and Rock to another.
Eleanor was welcomed back with open arms by most of the girls, but
Olive and Janet still held aloof, and did not join her special company
of friends. "She's so stuck up, now that she has a pony, that she
can hardly see," Eleanor heard Janet say one day, for Eleanor was not
above giving her head a little toss and looking supreme contempt at the
speaker whenever they met. "And it isn't because I've a pony," she told
Florence, "but I just despise her anyhow."

That very day Miss Reese made an announcement which set all the class
astir. "Since I do not expect to return to you next year, girls," she
said, "I thought we would have a little frolic before we part, and I
have planned to go a-Maying. But not on the first of May," she added.
"We will wait till it is warm enough to go with no danger of taking
cold. Now, I think it would be pleasant to try to have a real May
party, with a May-pole and a May-queen and all that. Each one of you
will be privileged to invite one guest, a boy if you like, for we must
have some boys along, and two weeks from to-day will cast votes for the
queen. That will give you time to think the matter over so you will not
decide hastily. I do not think we shall want to select the prettiest,
nor the wealthiest, but the one who shows the most loving disposition
or the most conscientious work, or some quality of mind or heart to
commend her." Not a girl but hoped that she would be selected, and not
one but felt that this was one of the most exciting events that she had
ever looked forward to.

"Oh, Florence, suppose one of us should be chosen," said Eleanor, as
the two were walking home from school. "Wouldn't it be perfectly lovely
to wear a flower crown and be dressed in white and carry a sceptre. Are
you going to invite any one?"

"Why, yes, I think I will invite Rock, unless you want to."

"Oh, no, so long as he comes it will not make any difference. Oh, don't
you hope you will be chosen?"

Florence was obliged to confess that she did hope so, but just how
greatly she desired the honor not even Eleanor knew. Florence loved
everything romantic, and it seemed to her that to be a May-queen
must be the summit of human bliss. She had been so short a time at
the school that she hardly dared to believe that she would stand a
chance of being chosen, much as she longed to be. She saw that her
Cousin Eleanor was very popular and that she would be one of the first
favorites. Olive Murdoch was an excellent student and was very careful
about obeying rules, and she was in many respects the most attentive
girl in the class. She had numerous friends, too, for where Olive liked
any one she could make herself very agreeable, and had the qualities
which made her a leader. Indeed, before the week was out, it looked as
if the two who would receive the most votes were Olive and Eleanor.

"I shall vote for you," Eleanor told Florence.

"And, of course, I shall vote for you," Florence returned. "Oh, Dimple,
if Olive Murdoch is chosen I don't believe I shall care to go to the
May party. I should hate to call her fair queen and all that. Are we to
vote for the maid of honor?"

"I don't know. Miss Reese hasn't said anything about it, but if we can
choose the one we most want, and if I should be queen, I shall want
you, of course."

"And I shall want you."

At last came the day when the votes were to be given. Twenty little
girls, with hearts beating fast and with hopes high, cast in their
votes; a box to receive them stood on Miss Reese's desk. It seemed
to the children, as they sat there with the odor of apple-blossoms
drifting in through the open windows, and the fair May green before
them as they looked out, that Miss Reese never had been so long over
anything. She separated the slips of paper into small heaps and
carefully counted each one over more than once.

At last she looked up, and smiled to see the little eager faces. "Olive
Murdoch, seven votes; Eleanor Dallas, six; Florence Graham, three;
Edith West, two; Leila Clark, two; Elsie Vail, one."

"Oh," came a little murmur from the class and Olive's face wore a
triumphant and self-satisfied expression, while Eleanor and Florence
looked at each other, reading in one another's face the disappointment
written there.

Suddenly Miss Reese spoke again: "Why, this is not right; there should
be but twenty votes and there are twenty-one. Some one has given two
votes. Now, shall we vote over again? Shall I call upon each girl to
announce her choice? or, since there seems to be no doubt but that
Olive Murdoch and Eleanor Dallas have received the greatest number of
votes, shall we consider them the candidates and let the class vote
over again for one or the other of these two girls? All in favor of
this last plan please raise their right hands." Up went most of the
right hands and Miss Reese nodded approvingly.

"Now," she said, "each girl can write her choice on a slip of paper and
bring it to me, and then there will be no mistake. Jessie, give out
these slips." A little flush arose to Olive's cheeks and she whispered
something to the girl next her, who nodded in reply.

The room was so still that the singing of a robin outside in the
apple-tree seemed the only sound to be heard. Then one by one the
girls came forward with their slips of paper. Miss Reese read each one
silently, and as Olive's turn came she looked up with a queer little
smile at the girl who dropped her eyes and went back to her seat with
a flushed face. Miss Reese again counted the votes. "This time we have
just twenty," she said. "There are for Eleanor Dallas twelve votes; for
Olive Murdoch, eight." Every girl turned and looked at Eleanor whose
face turned a rosy red and in her confusion she said quite loud enough
for them all to hear, "Oh, Florence, I wish it had been you."

Miss Reese rapped on her desk. "Now," she said, "I think it will be
best to take a different way to choose the maid of honor. Let each girl
think of whom she would like and give her reason for it. I think that
will make it quite interesting. You may begin, Elsie."

"I think Olive should be the one because she came so near being the
queen," said Elsie.

Miss Reese nodded to the next girl who said she thought that some girl
who had received no vote should be chosen.

Then came one who said: "I think Florence Graham, because she is a
stranger here, and she isn't going to stay very long. I think it would
be more polite to choose her." This seemed to strike the most of them
favorably, and in the end Florence was made supremely happy by being
elected maid of honor, and this important matter being settled, there
were other questions to be discussed and the May party in all its ins
and outs was talked over.

Although there were some disappointed little souls, as a rule all
were well satisfied that the choice of queen had fallen where it did.
Eleanor was radiantly happy and yet she could not help feeling sorry
for Olive, who had counted upon being the favored one, and who gave
Eleanor a look of scorn as she passed her. "She needn't look so," said
Florence indignantly. "It was perfectly fair, and every one says so. I
haven't a doubt but that she voted for herself," which, if the truth
were known, was true, and, indeed, it was also true that the extra vote
on the first ballot was cast by Olive. If Miss Reese suspected this
she never said so, but she did know that Olive's name was on the slip
of paper which she brought up, and that was why she gave Olive the
quizzical little smile, for no other girl in the whole school had voted
for herself.

Rock was jubilant when he heard the decision. "Hurrah for Queen
Eleanor!" he cried. "I am just delighted, and all the more that you got
ahead of Olive Murdoch."

But Eleanor looked sober when he said this. "She's dreadfully
disappointed," she said, "and I'm awfully sorry for her. She studied
real hard and does her lessons so well. I sort of think that she
should have been chosen."

"Why, Dimple Dallas," exclaimed Florence. "I don't see how you can say
that."

"I do think so. She is the best scholar in the school."

"Yes, and she's the hatefullest and the slyest." Florence was too loyal
to Eleanor to believe any good of Olive.

"Well, anyhow, Jessie is a nice child and I like her," Eleanor
maintained. "She was never mean to me once, and if you were not to
be my maid of honor I should choose her next." This Eleanor said to
Jessie, and furthermore, invited her to go with Florence, Rock and
herself to gather flowers for the arbor under which the queen was to
sit. Great masses of mountain laurel, wild honeysuckle and other spring
blossoms they carried home in the little pony-cart, and long garlands
were woven for the arbor.

"Won't you come and help us make the wreaths?" Eleanor asked Jessie.

"I should like to," she answered, "but mamma said I was to come right
home as soon as we got back from the woods. I have had a lovely time,
and I'd like to stay," the child repeated wistfully. "I just love that
little pony."

"You shall drive with us whenever you want to," Eleanor assured her, as
she bade her good-bye.

Eleanor was very thoughtful all the rest of the day, even when she and
Rock and Florence were busy over the crown for the May-queen to wear
the following day.

[Illustration: "BUSY OVER THE CROWN FOR THE QUEEN TO WEAR"]

"We'll keep some of the prettiest bunches to trim our dresses with,"
said Florence. "Bubbles, bring us a basin of water to put them in. I
shall have a little bunch on each shoulder and you can have the same,
Dimple. Oh, where did you get those lovely lilies of the valley?"

"Mr. Atkinson sent them to me. I met him on the street and he was
asking me about the May party."

"Where are they going to set up the May-pole?" Rock asked.

"Just back of Mr. Atkinson's; in that pretty meadow with the grove at
one end."

"What a lovely place!" exclaimed Florence. "Where are you going,
Dimple?"

"I'm just going to speak to mamma." And a moment later she entered
her mother's room with a very serious face.

"What is the matter with the May-queen?" her mother asked.

Two tears started to Eleanor's eyes and she hid her head on her
mother's shoulder. "I want to be May-queen so much," she said in a
stifled voice.

"Well, dearie, I don't see anything to grieve you in that."

"Do you think I ought to give up to Florence or Jessie? It seems mean
not to give them the chance."

Her mother smiled. "I don't think you are called upon to do anything
of the kind. You were chosen fairly by the class, and you have no more
right to refuse than if a presidential candidate were to say: 'Mr.
So-and-so wants so much to be president. I'll give my place to him.' It
is very kind of my little girl to think of such a thing, but I don't
think it would do. Let the matter rest as it is. Every one will have a
good time, and next year, or upon some other occasion, perhaps Jessie
will have another chance."

"But Florence won't."

"Maybe she will. We might have a May party of our own next year in
Florence's honor, and then she could be queen and Jessie maid of honor,
if that would do."

"Oh, mamma, that is a lovely plan for you to think of, I feel real
comfortable now."

And, therefore, with not a cloud to mar their pleasure the children
started off for the May party. The little pony, which they had named
Spice, wore a garland around his neck, and when Eleanor, dressed in
white, with her maid of honor by her side, appeared in the little
flower-decked pony-cart, a shout arose from the children, and with one
accord they began to sing "God save the Queen."

Then Eleanor was helped down by two of her gentlemen-in-waiting, and
was conducted to her throne; her crown was placed upon her head and her
sceptre in her hand. Then a merry, merry time they had dancing around
the May-pole, weaving in and out with their many-hued ribbons. The
lookers-on in Mr. Atkinson's garden said it was the prettiest sight the
town had seen in a long time.

After this they played games and sang songs and romped and ran and
searched the woods for wild flowers till it was time for feasting.

When each basket was opened a store of good things appeared; these were
spread out upon the grass, and the little queen was served first. But
as she was eating her ice cream, she saw a pair of sparkling black eyes
peeping through the fence. "Oh, there is Bubbles," she exclaimed. "Poor
little Bubbles."

"What is your Royal Highness' wish concerning her?" asked Rock with
quick wit, as he dropped upon one knee. "Is it yon sable maiden who has
attracted your Majesty's notice?"

"Yes, it is. I wish she could have some of these good things."

"Where is the Premier?" asked Rock. "Oh, there she is. Miss Reese,
her Majesty, the Queen, desires a consultation." And Miss Reese came
forward.

"There is Bubbles," the queen said in very familiar language. "Please,
Miss Reese, can some one take her some ice cream and cake? Is there
enough?"

"An abundance. I will see that she has some," was the reply.

"May it please your Majesty, I will undertake the errand," said Rock.
"Do you send me in quest of the hand-maid who has found favor in your
sight?" Rock's language was a funny mixture of courtly and Scriptural
expressions.

"Yes, do go, Rock, there's a dear." And Bubbles was made supremely
happy by a generously piled up plate of cake and ice cream.

For some reason Don had taken a sudden liking to Rock, in spite of the
latter's snubs and his coolness toward him. Rock was a bright boy with
a ready wit and much ingenuity, and Don, with the admiration a small
boy so often feels for a larger one, followed him around upon this May
day until Rock, at first annoyed, was finally sorry for the smaller boy
and began to pay him some attention, and to Eleanor's surprise, she saw
the two hobnobbing like old friends before the day was out.

Whether it was on Rock's account or not, it is true that when the
queen's chariot, as Rock called it, was driven up for Eleanor and
Florence, no one was louder in his cheers than Don, and despite the old
grievances, Eleanor could not help being pleased by this evidence of
Don's good-will, and she drove off as happy as a little girl could be,
followed by shouts of "Long live Queen Eleanor!" Spice shaking his mane
and evidently in high feather at such a frolic.

"Has my dear daughter had a happy day?" asked Eleanor's mother as she
kissed her good-night.

"So happy, mamma." There was little pause, then Eleanor said: "Don has
to pick strawberries all day Saturday, for Mr. Snyder, and Rock is
going to help him. May Florence and Bubbles and I go too? We can take
Jessie and get through a lot."

"I cannot allow you to pick berries all day, dear, but you may spend
a part of the afternoon in that way if you want to. Rock can do as he
chooses, of course, but, how comes it that you are asking permission
for Bubbles?"

"Don likes us all now," returned the child, "and Bubbles says if we
pick for him, why, she will too, but I don't believe Olive will ever
care for any of us."

"Perhaps she will. If one goes right along and does the best she knows
how, after a while even her enemies will see her as she really is.
What do you think Cousin Ellen said to me to-day when we stood together
in Mr. Atkinson's garden looking at the May party?"

"I don't know. What did she say, mamma?"

"She said: 'Eleanor makes a very sweet little queen, doesn't she?'"

"Oh, mamma, truly?"

"Yes, truly. I think Mr. Snyder and Doctor Sullivan and--Don, perhaps,
have had something to do with her change of opinion. At all events, we
may hope that even Olive will be friends with you yet."

Eleanor shook her head, but just then Florence called, "Queen Eleanor,
your Majesty, aren't you ever coming to bed? What makes you stay so
long?"

"'Cause I'm so happy," answered Eleanor, after a last "Good-night!"





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIMPLE DALLAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Les Pirates Chinois
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Les Pirates Chinois
        Ma captivité dans les mers de la Chine

Author: Fanny Loviot

Release date: February 15, 2025 [eBook #75379]

Language: French

Original publication: Paris: Librairie Nouvelle, 1860

Credits: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES PIRATES CHINOIS ***





                          LES PIRATES CHINOIS

 Paris.--Imprimerie de la Librairie Nouvelle, A. Bourdilliat, 15, rue
                                Breda.

                [Illustration: portrait, Fanny Loviot]




                             FANNY LOVIOT

                                  LES

                            PIRATES CHINOIS

                             MA CAPTIVITÉ
                       DANS LES MERS DE LA CHINE


                  NOUVELLE ÉDITION REVUE ET AUGMENTÉE
                       avec portrait de l’auteur


                                 PARIS
                          LIBRAIRIE NOUVELLE
                      BOULEVARD DES ITALIENS, 15

                    A. BOURDILLIAT ET Cᵉ, ÉDITEURS

            La traduction et la reproduction sont réservées

                                 1860




PRÉFACE


Au moment de mettre sous presse une nouvelle édition des _Pirates
chinois_, j’éprouve le besoin de remercier le public pour l’accueil
bienveillant qu’il a fait à ce livre. Encouragée par le succès, j’ai
voulu le revoir et le corriger, le compléter autant que possible, en
glissant çà et là dans mon récit quelques traits saillants des mœurs de
ce peuple étrange, au milieu duquel j’ai forcément vécu. Cette relation,
écrite sous l’impression des terreurs que j’ai éprouvées pendant que
j’étais au pouvoir des pirates chinois, offre, du reste, un puissant
intérêt d’actualité en ce moment même où tous les regards sont portés
vers la Chine; et pourtant, lorsque je publiai cet ouvrage, je ne me
doutai nullement que les soldats de France et d’Angleterre allaient, à
une époque aussi rapprochée, pénétrer dans cet empire mystérieux à
l’extrême Orient, et que les faits relatés de ma propre histoire
viendraient donner une fois de plus raison aux événements du jour. Or,
dans un temps non déterminé, mais qu’on peut prévoir, nos officiers de
terre et de mer rapporteront de cette expédition de précieux souvenirs,
et peut-être alors ce livre aura-t-il réellement son utilité, sa place,
car on le consultera comme un document exact de ce qui existait il y a
quelques années.

                                                          FANNY LOVIOT.




                                VOYAGE

                       EN CALIFORNIE ET EN CHINE




CHAPITRE PREMIER

     Départ du Havre.--Regrets de la vie parisienne.--Un banc de
     rochers.--Rio-Janeiro.--Le bétail humain.--Départ de Rio.--Six
     semaines en mer.--Le cap Horn.--Tempêtes.--Mort d’un
     matelot.--Pêche d’un requin.--Terre, terre!--Le pays de l’or.


En l’année 1852, par une belle journée de printemps, je me rendais au
Havre avec l’intention de m’embarquer pour la Californie. J’accompagnais
ma sœur aînée, que des affaires commerciales et l’espoir d’une prompte
fortune attiraient dans ce pays. Or, nous passâmes quelques jours en
cette ville, et le 30 mai, jour de la Pentecôte, nous nous embarquâmes
sur une petite goëlette qui avait nom _l’Indépendance_.

Outre le capitaine, l’armateur et l’équipage, notre navire emportait
dix-huit passagers, la plupart maris et femmes, un tiers célibataires,
et tous animés d’un désir de prospérité que l’on concevra facilement.

Au moment de mettre à la voile la foule encombrait le quai, et nous
entendions les uns et les autres se récrier, non sans quelque effroi,
sur la petitesse de notre goëlette. «Jamais, disaient-ils, elle ne
pourra doubler le cap Horn; ce n’est qu’une coquille de noix que le
moindre coup de vent fera chavirer, etc.» Qu’on juge de l’impression
produite par de telles paroles sur des Parisiennes qui, comme ma sœur et
moi, voyageaient pour la première fois; nous nous regardâmes avec
quelque hésitation, mais il n’était plus temps.

Quelques minutes après, nous entendîmes la voix du capitaine qui criait:
«Lâchez les amarres!...» Le grand sacrifice était accompli... Adieu nos
amis, adieu France, adieu Paris, seconde patrie dans la patrie même...
Adieu le confortable... les soins de la toilette, les spectacles... le
sommeil tranquille... l’intérieur de famille; que sais-je? enfin, tout
ce qui fait aimer la vie. Mais pendant cinq mois au moins rien qu’un
hamac pour lit, pour plafond le ciel, pour plancher la mer; pas d’autre
musique que le bruit des vagues et le chant rude des matelots. Nous
allons chercher fortune; que trouverons-nous?

J’avais en perspective une rude et longue traversée; au premier
vacillement du navire, mon cœur se serra. Mille pensées diverses me
traversaient l’esprit: c’était l’espoir et le regret qui combattaient en
moi. Je m’accoudais sur le bastingage, et pour adieu à la France, comme
dernier témoignage d’affection aux amis que nous laissions, et qui nous
suivaient des yeux, j’agitais mon mouchoir, et je voyais peu à peu
disparaître la jetée, puis la côte d’Ingouville avec ses maisons en
amphithéâtre, Sainte-Adresse, devenue célèbre, grâce à Alphonse Karr,
puis le cap la Hêve, et ensuite plus rien que l’immensité.

Le passage du golfe de Gascogne (en plein pot au noir, comme disent les
marins) ne s’effectua pas sans quelque danger pour nous. Nous voguions
constamment au milieu de la pluie et du brouillard, placés entre un
ciel gris et des lames énormes, et je supportai fort mal ce commencement
de traversée. Le dimanche, qui était le septième jour après notre
départ, j’essayai de sortir sur le pont; nous longions toujours les
côtes de l’Angleterre, et je pus encore apercevoir le phare du cap
Lizard; mes yeux fixaient avec peine cette lumière qui est le guide et
l’espoir du voyageur en mer.

Après avoir bravement passé la Manche, nous atteignîmes les régions
tropicales, et je ne me lassais point d’admirer la pureté du ciel et la
splendeur de ses couchers de soleil, dont ni plumes ni pinceaux ne
peuvent rendre l’imposante beauté. Un mois s’était passé, lorsqu’un
jour, en plein midi et par un soleil ardent, quand l’espérance se lisait
sur tous les visages, nous entendîmes un roulement semblable au bruit du
tonnerre; la mer était calme, on ne voyait pas un nuage au ciel, aucun
navire en vue. Aussitôt, tout le monde fut sur le pont; le même bruit
continuait et chacun se regardait avec effroi; le second, monté dans les
haubans avec sa longue-vue, cria: «Rochers! un banc de rochers!--Vire de
bord!» répondit le capitaine; il était temps. Heureusement pour nous,
notre goëlette n’avait qu’une égratignure; mais il faut dire, pour
expliquer ce fait, que le vent soufflait mollement et que nous ne fîmes
qu’effleurer les récifs.

Pendant la courte durée de cet incident, la plupart des femmes s’étaient
évanouies, les autres poussaient des cris lamentables. Quant à moi,
j’étais pétrifiée, et cependant je n’avais pas compris l’imminence du
danger; mais la figure du capitaine me sert de baromètre en mer, et je
dois dire que ce jour-là le baromètre n’était pas rassurant. Ma pauvre
sœur était verte d’épouvante. «Eh bien! lui dis-je, toi qui désirais à
notre départ une toute petite tempête comme échantillon, il ne faut pas
désespérer, voici un assez joli commencement.»

Il avait huit jours que cet incident était passé lorsque nous aperçûmes
les côtes du Brésil. Avec quelle joie nous découvrîmes la montagne que
les marins appellent _Pain-de-Sucre_, et qui domine la baie. Je crois
qu’il n’existe pas sous le ciel un plus admirable point de vue, et il
est resté gravé dans ma mémoire en traits ineffaçables; je crois voir
encore ces collines boisées, ces anses solitaires, ces jolis vallons,
ces arbres toujours verts, cette immense étendue d’eau salée, tout ce
paysage merveilleux, tels qu’on croit rêver en les voyant.

L’entrée du port est défendue par plusieurs forts: celui de Santa-Cruz,
bâti entre la montagne de Pico, et ceux de Villagagnon, de _ila das
Cabras_ (île des Serpents). Ces deux derniers forts, qui sont des plus
imposants, sont construits sur deux îlots dans l’intérieur de la baie. A
Rio-Janeiro, nous fûmes heureux de retrouver une partie des habitudes et
des mœurs européennes.

Rio est, comme on le sait, une ville entièrement commerçante: le Havre,
la Bourse, les marchés sont encombrés de marchands et de matelots; la
variété des costumes, le chant des nègres portant des fardeaux, le son
des cloches, la physionomie diverse des Allemands, des Italiens venus là
pour faire le négoce, tout contribue à donner à cette ville l’aspect le
plus étrange.

Nous passâmes quinze jours au Brésil, nous les employâmes à visiter la
ville et les environs. Les montagnes qui s’élèvent vers le nord-est sont
en partie couvertes par de larges constructions. On y voit le collége
des Jésuites, le couvent des Bénédictins, le palais épiscopal, le fort
de Concéiado, et l’aqueduc qui amène l’eau des torrents du Corcavado
jusque dans les fontaines de la cité. Le palais de Saint-Christophe,
résidence de l’empereur, est orné d’un portique et de deux galeries de
colonnes, et le _Passao public_ est planté de mouryniers et de
lauriers-roses (cours public). La rue la plus remarquable est la rue
Ouvidor; là sont les riches magasins dont les étalages rappellent un peu
ceux de nos villes d’Europe. Je ne manquai point, en véritable femme, de
m’occuper de la toilette des Brésiliennes. Quoique ces dames aient la
prétention de suivre exactement les modes françaises, le goût portugais
domine dans leurs ajustements, et la plupart d’entre elles sont si
chargées de bijoux, qu’elles ressemblent à la montre d’un orfèvre. Elles
aiment avant tout ce qui se voit de loin. Du reste, assez jolies,
quoique peut-être un peu trop pâles et d’une pâleur jaune. Les
Brésiliennes sont volontiers familières et même coquettes avec les
étrangers; leur nonchalance est extrême. Étendues une partie de la
journée sur des canapés recouverts de nattes, elles dédaignent les
soins du ménage. Quant à leur instruction, elle est complétement nulle;
leur conversation n’est ordinairement qu’un commérage où leurs plaintes
sur la race noire tient une large place. Il n’est pas rare de voir ces
petites maîtresses, si indolentes, se secouer de leur torpeur pour
enfoncer de longues aiguilles dans les bras ou dans le sein des
négresses qui les servent. La société de Rio-Janeiro est divisée en
coteries; quoique le jeune empereur du Brésil protége les sciences, les
lettres et les arts, son peuple ne se préoccupe guère que de commerce et
de gain; et, il y a peu de temps encore, un libraire de Paris, auquel je
demandais quel genre de livres se vendait le mieux à Rio, me répondit
que c’étaient les livres avec les reliures rouges. Quant au commerce,
depuis qu’il est devenu indépendant de celui de la métropole, il a pris
une extension prodigieuse: les sucres, les cafés, les cotons, le rhum,
le tabac, etc., etc., et tous les articles d’exportation s’élèvent,
dit-on, à plusieurs millions de piastres. Un jour, pour me rendre à
l’hôtel que j’habitais, et dont j’ai eu l’ingratitude d’oublier le nom,
quoiqu’on y mangeât une excellente cuisine française, je fus obligée de
passer derrière le palais de l’empereur et je me reculai saisie
d’épouvante: devant moi, derrière moi, à côté, partout des nègres,
négresses et négrillons, tous hideux, les uns de vieillesse, les autres
de misère ou de maladie, étendus au soleil et cherchant leur vermine.
Vivant là comme un bétail humain, ils me regardaient avec un hébêtement
qui me fit mal, car quinze jours au Brésil n’avaient pas suffi pour me
faire considérer les nègres comme des animaux; et, de retour de mes
voyages, je crois fermement encore qu’ils appartiennent à la race
humaine.

Je visitai avec ravissement les environs de Rio, et je ne puis oublier
dans mes excursions celle de Tijuca, où nous arrivâmes, par les plus
délicieux sentiers, à la région verdoyante où se précipite la cascade;
il nous fallut deux jours pour arriver là, mais nous fîmes halte dans
une plantation où nous reçûmes le meilleur accueil. Le lendemain, au
jour naissant, nous nous trouvâmes en face de la cascade sur laquelle le
soleil reflétait mille teintes variées au milieu d’une enceinte de
rochers. A ce beau spectacle, je dois dire à ma louange que je commençai
à regretter un peu moins Paris et le boulevard des Italiens. J’avais
bien vu jouer les grandes eaux de Versailles; mais, n’en déplaise à
l’ombre de Louis XIV, je les trouvai dépassées.

Ce qui me plaisait moins, je l’avoue, c’était le voisinage dont on me
parlait, les jaguars et autres bêtes qui peuplent ces vastes solitudes,
et j’eusse mieux aimé admirer certains de ces animaux au Jardin des
Plantes que de les rencontrer là.

Comme le temps paraissait favorable, le capitaine ayant fait de
nouvelles provisions, nous quittâmes Rio-Janeiro. Je dois dire ici que
sur dix-huit passagers, huit nous avaient abandonnés, les uns parce
qu’ils avaient trouvé des emplois à leur convenance, les autres, le
courage leur faisant faute au moment décisif, reculaient devant les
hasards d’une aussi périlleuse traversée.

Le 7 juillet, nous remîmes à la voile pour la Californie. En voyant
partir notre petite goëlette pour un si long voyage, les Brésiliens ne
se montrèrent pas plus rassurants pour nous que les Havrais ne l’avaient
été dans leurs prévisions. «Jamais, disaient-ils, la goëlette
_l’Indépendance_ ne pourra résister aux tempêtes inévitables du cap
Horn.» Ma sœur m’engageait à ne pas continuer notre voyage; mais je ne
cédai point à ses craintes, que cependant je partageais intérieurement.
Indépendamment du désir de faire fortune, je ne sais quel démon me
poussait, malgré mon amour de la patrie, à m’en éloigner davantage et à
rechercher des dangers tout en les craignant, j’étais fière d’avoir
passé la ligne et je ne voulais pas rester en si beau chemin. Notre
goëlette ne m’inspirait pas beaucoup de confiance; mais il eût fallu
payer un autre passage, et nous avions déjà dépensé beaucoup pour notre
pacotille.

Nous passâmes plusieurs semaines avec le plus beau temps du monde. Nous
étions cinq femmes à bord, nous causions, nous brodions, nous jouions au
loto comme dans notre chambre. Le soir, nous nous réunissions tous sur
le pont, et l’on chantait, quelquefois faux, il est vrai, mais en mer on
n’est pas difficile; puis, d’ailleurs, c’étaient souvent des chœurs, des
airs français, et loin d’elle, tout ce qui rappelle la patrie est bien
venu.

Une seule chose passablement essentielle venait parfois assombrir nos
chants. C’était notre nourriture, qui était bien des plus détestables.
Depuis longtemps déjà mon estomac était fatigué de viande de conserve,
de soupe aux choux sans beurre et de morue à moitié pourrie. Ces
détails-là manquent de poésie, mais ils ne manquent pas de vérité. Les
vivres sont excellents sur les steamers qui relâchent souvent et qui ont
du bétail à bord; mais sur les navires marchands, tels que notre pauvre
_Indépendance_, on ne donne trop souvent au passager qu’une nourriture
insuffisante et malsaine.

Notre cuisinier, qui se livrait agréablement à la boisson malgré les
invectives et les coups qu’il recevait, ne faisait pas le moindre
progrès, il semblait confier au hasard le soin de sa cuisine, plusieurs
fois le capitaine l’avait menacé des châtiments les plus sévères, mais
il était incorrigible; en outre, il n’ignorait pas qu’on ne pouvait le
destituer de ses hautes fonctions culinaires, d’où dépendait le sort de
nos estomacs.

Chaque jour qui s’écoulait glissait dans nos cœurs les craintes les plus
vives, car nous étions à la veille d’affronter ce redoutable cap Horn.
Le temps commençait à se refroidir, et la mer, plus grosse, ne nous
berçait plus, mais nous secouait; alors plus de broderie, plus de loto,
plus de chant: nous subissions tous les inconvénients d’un voyage
maritime. On ne voyait que des visages jaunes, terreux, renfrognés; on
n’entendait que plaintes et gémissements; nous ne courions alors nul
danger, mais nous subissions deux fléaux cruels: le mal de mer et
l’ennui. Enfin, nous l’aperçûmes ce cap tout couvert de glaces, et
malgré moi, je pensais aux sinistres prédictions faites depuis le
départ; mais, à mon grand étonnement, plus nous en approchions et plus
la mer devenait calme; nous eûmes même un calme plat. Nous restâmes
quarante-huit heures sans bouger de place. Mais, hélas, c’était le
précurseur d’une tempête des plus violentes. Les vents soufflent avec
une telle impétuosité dans ces parages qu’en un moment la mer souleva
des vagues plus hautes que des montagnes, et ces flots écumants
battaient sans merci de tous côtés à la fois les flancs de notre fragile
goëlette. Ce passage fut des plus terribles! Le capitaine, dès le début
fit carguer précipitamment les voiles. Dans cette manœuvre, un jeune
matelot, monté sur la grande vergue, fut emporté par une rafale;
on ne s’en aperçut que lorsqu’il ne fut plus temps de lui porter
secours. J’entends encore la voix du capitaine appelant et comptant
ses matelots: «Jacques, Pierre, André, Remy, Christian, Robert, où
êtes-vous?...--Présents.--Et Jean-Marie, Jean-Marie!» et toutes ces

rudes voix qui criaient: «Jean-Marie!» Jean-Marie ne répondit pas, il
avait disparu; sur huit hommes d’équipage, nous en avions perdu un. Le
pauvre Jean-Marie était le charpentier du bord. C’était son premier
voyage; il devait, à son retour, se marier; mais il avait épousé la
mort. Personne ne dormit à bord cette nuit-là. On avait raison,
pensais-je, c’est un lieu dangereux et funèbre que le cap Horn. La mer
mugissante et le vent qui ne cessait de souffler formaient un lugubre
accompagnement à ces sombres pensées. Nous restâmes ainsi douze jours en
panne; puis, nous doublâmes le cap; bientôt après la chaleur revint, et
nous repassâmes la ligne pour la seconde fois. Notre navigation dans les
mers du Mexique et du Pérou fut assez heureuse. Jusqu’alors nous avions
conservé l’espoir que notre capitaine ferait une relâche à Lima, mais il
n’en fit rien.

Les vivres devenaient de plus en plus rares, tout le monde se plaignait
de l’armateur; on calculait qu’il nous fallait huit ou dix jours avant
d’arriver à San Francisco. Si un mauvais temps nous retardait, nous
étions exposés à mourir de faim; toutes les physionomies étaient
rembrunies. Je commençais à regretter de n’avoir pas cédé aux craintes
de ma sœur. Sur ces entrefaites, on pêcha un requin; il était d’une
telle grosseur qu’après l’avoir harponné et hissé sur le pont, je ne pus
m’empêcher de me sauver tout effrayée; mais aussitôt, nos matelots,
armés de leurs couteaux, s’élancèrent sur lui et le dépecèrent; il passa
ainsi morceau par morceau dans les mains de notre abominable cuisinier,
qui l’assaisonna à différentes sauces et nous en fit manger pendant
trois jours consécutifs; c’est horrible à avouer, mais cela parut bon
presque à tout le monde, tellement, depuis longtemps déjà, on souffrait
des privations de toute sorte; il n’y eut que le capitaine et deux
matelots qui refusèrent d’y toucher. Ce refus venait, non de dégoût,
mais d’une sorte de superstition; les matelots n’aiment pas manger le
requin, s’imaginant qu’un jour ou l’autre ils peuvent tomber sous la
dent d’un de ces monstres.

S’il est une jouissance inconnue aux gens de loisirs, dont la seule
ambition est de les connaître toutes, sans sortir des habitudes où
s’écoule leur vie nonchalante; s’il est une félicité qu’ignorent ces
sybarites des grandes villes, ces chercheurs d’or dans les placers du
bonheur, qui veulent épuiser les joies de ce monde sans risquer leur
existence, c’est cette joie immense, ineffable, qui emplit le cœur,
lorsqu’on touche au terme d’un long voyage. Il faut avoir passé six mois
de sa vie entre le ciel et l’eau, en butte aux tempêtes, aux naufrages,
aux incendies, pour comprendre le délire qui s’empare de tous, quand un
matelot, monté dans les vergues, d’où il contemple l’horizon, prononce
ces mots magiques: «Terre! terre!» Tout le monde se précipite sur le
pont, les hommes relèvent la tête avec orgueil, leur physionomie semble
dire: «Malgré la distance et les dangers, rien n’a pu m’empêcher
d’atteindre mon but.» Les femmes pleurent, car, chez elles, toute
émotion de joie ou de peine se traduit ainsi. A la vue de
San-Francisco, tous les passagers de notre goëlette, oubliant les
souffrances d’une longue traversée, se reprirent à espérer la fortune,
ainsi qu’ils l’avaient fait au départ; ma sœur et moi nous fîmes comme
eux, et le présent se colora pour nous de rêves d’avenir. Pauvre France!
tu fus alors oubliée, et nous tendîmes les bras à cette terre
inhospitalière dont l’or est le dieu véritable.




CHAPITRE II

     La baie de San-Francisco.--Navires abandonnés.--La Mission
     Dolores.--Mœurs des Chinois émigrés.--La race noire.--Les habitués
     de Jackson street.--Maisons des jeux.--La bande noire.--Comité de
     vigilance.--La pendaison.


Le 21 novembre 1852, nous distinguâmes les petits îlots nommés
_Farellones_, qui sont devant le goulet de la baie de San-Francisco, et
la pointe Bonetta, qui s’avance à gauche, à une assez grande distance
dans la mer. A cet endroit, un pilote monta à bord de notre goëlette
pour lui faciliter l’entrée du goulet qui est très-étroit et n’a guère
plus d’un demi-mille de largeur. Les rochers escarpés et les collines de
sable, couvertes de broussailles qui bordent le rivage, se dessinaient à
nos regards; un magnifique spectacle vint alors nous frapper; à mesure
que nous avancions, nous découvrions des navires de toutes nations avec
leurs pavillons de différentes couleurs, pressés les uns contre les
autres, comme pour attester l’importance de cette cité moderne. Mais
l’œil se fixait bientôt avec étonnement sur les bas-côtés. Là, gisaient
pêle-mêle des navires dont les flancs tombaient en ruine; les pavillons,
aux couleurs effacées, pendaient comme des loques au milieu des vergues
brisées; les ponts étaient effondrés, et la mousse poussait déjà entre
les planches désunies; ils étaient depuis longtemps abandonnés par les
équipages, qui, à peine débarqués, avaient fui vers les placers, en
proie à la soif effrénée de l’or; ils offraient aux nouveaux venus un
triste exemple des désastres que l’amour insatiable des richesses peut
causer.

La Californie faisait autrefois partie du Mexique. En 1846, les
Américains, après une guerre qui dura un an, la soumirent et
l’annexèrent aux États de l’Union. Deux ans plus tard, le capitaine
Sutter faisait surgir du sein de cette terre aurifère le premier lingot
qui devait attirer l’attention, et le déplacement de plusieurs millions
d’âmes.

Avant la découverte des mines d’or, San-Francisco était un port de
relâche pour les navires baleiniers qui venaient s’y radouber et y
prendre des provisions. Les rapports des marins du continent européen
avec les Indiens se bornaient à des échanges de peaux. Il y a plus d’un
demi-siècle, des missionnaires espagnols arrivèrent dans ce pays et
construisirent, à plusieurs milles du rivage, parmi les huttes
d’Indiens, une petite église nommée la _Mission Dolorès_ et qui existe
encore aujourd’hui. Lorsque les solitudes de la Californie furent
envahies par les Américains et les Européens qu’attirait la récente
découverte des mines d’or, ce lieu désert, où la foi religieuse avait
seule pénétré, devint un des lieux les plus fréquentés par les habitants
de San-Francisco. On traça une belle route, des établissements de toutes
sortes s’élevèrent, comme par enchantement, autour de la modeste
chapelle, et le chemin de la Mission est devenu l’une des plus
brillantes promenades de la ville.

A l’époque de mon arrivée (novembre 1852), San-Francisco présentait
encore un aspect bien bizarre, avec ses rues sablonneuses, ses trottoirs
en planches et beaucoup de ses maisons construites en bois, en fer et en
briques. Du reste, l’activité la plus grande y régnait partout, et, ce
qui me frappa tout d’abord, ce fut le va-et-vient de cette population
composée d’hommes et de femmes de races et de couleurs différentes,
revêtus de leurs costumes nationaux. On coudoyait à chaque instant les
hommes de l’ouest et de l’est de l’Amérique, les Indiens des îles Havaï
ou Sandwich et de Taïti, les Européens de toutes les parties du
continent. Les émigrations ayant été très-fréquentes pendant les années
qui précédèrent mon arrivée, la population avait considérablement
augmenté, et San-Francisco pouvait alors contenir environ soixante mille
âmes.

Mais cette ville allait de jour en jour changer de physionomie: des
constructions en pierre commençaient à s’élever; Montgommery street, une
des plus belles rues, était pavée et laissait voir de superbes maisons;
des magasins, des cafés, des hôtels magnifiques, étincelaient, le soir,
aux lumières, et, en voyant la foule sortir de _Metropolitan-Theater_,
qui est dans cette rue, l’on ne pouvait s’imaginer que, six ans
auparavant, les Indiens chassaient à cette même place, avec le _lasso_,
les bœufs et les chevaux sauvages.

Et pourtant San-Francisco a été détruit au moins six fois par des
incendies; les plus considérables furent ceux de 1852. Mais la
prodigieuse rapidité avec laquelle on reconstruisait de la veille au
lendemain laissait à peine de trace.

La vie matérielle commençait à y devenir un peu moins chère que par le
passé; on pouvait trouver une chambre meublée pour 40 piastres (une
piastre vaut 5 francs), ce qui était une remarquable diminution sur les
premières années, où des boutiques s’étaient louées 100, 200 et jusqu’à
600 piastres par mois, contenant deux pièces de dix-huit ou quatorze
pieds de long sur onze de large. La viande, et surtout le gibier,
étaient à meilleur marché; le mouton s’était vendu jusqu’à 1 piastre la
livre, et le veau une demi-piastre. Le lait avait coûté 1 piastre la
bouteille, puis 4 réaux, 2 fr. 50; 2 réaux, 1 fr. 25; 1 réal, 60
centimes. Les légumes s’étaient vendus à des prix exorbitants en raison
de leur rareté même; une livre de pommes de terre n’avait pu s’obtenir
que moyennant 2 réaux; les œufs avaient coûté jusqu’à 6 piastres la
douzaine, et se vendaient encore 3 piastres. Le linge, pour le
blanchissage d’une douzaine de pièces, 5 piastres; une bouteille de
champagne, 5 piastres. Les décrotteurs en plein vent, pour cirer une
paire de bottes, 4 réaux; en revanche, le saumon se vendait sur tous les
marchés à 1 réal la livre; enfin, à San-Francisco, dans les
commencements de son existence, 1 piastre suffisait à peine pour le plus
simple repas dépourvu de vin.

Une partie de cette population est originaire de la Chine; si je
mentionne en premier les émigrés chinois, c’est que leurs
établissements, au milieu de gens d’un autre pays que le leur,
présentent un fait curieux par lui-même. On connaît en effet leur
répugnance à entretenir des relations avec les autres peuples. Bien que
leur génie industrieux, patient et persévérant les poussât vers cette
terre jeune et féconde, qu’ils se savaient impuissants à conquérir, ils
avaient néanmoins emporté avec eux les instincts insociables et
particuliers à leur race; aussi, pour ne pas frayer avec les Européens,
s’étaient-ils relégués principalement dans un quartier spécial;
Sacramento street est le centre de leurs habitations et conserve
complétement la physionomie d’une place de Canton ou de toute autre
ville chinoise. Leur commerce se compose exclusivement des produits et
denrées qu’ils importent de leur pays, et, dans Dupont street, ils ont
des maisons où des tables de jeux sont dressées pour exciter la passion
de ceux de leurs compatriotes qui veulent tenter la fortune.

Ils ont aussi un théâtre, mais un vrai théâtre (en planches bien
entendu), où ils représentent des pièces chinoises, leurs sujets sont
d’une singularité telle, qu’il serait bien difficile d’en faire la plus
légère description. Ce sont des cris, des grimaces, des contorsions qui
vous surprennent et vous donnent à chaque instant l’envie d’un fou rire.
Les femmes sont généralement exclues de ces troupes artistiques.
L’emploi des ingénues et autres est confié à de jeunes garçons; il faut
leur accorder cependant qu’ils déploient la plus grande richesse dans
leurs costumes, on ne les évalue pas à moins de cinquante à soixante
mille piastres.

Une autre population non moins bizarre se fait encore remarquer à
San-Francisco; ce sont les noirs. Ainsi que les Chinois, ils se sont
réunis comme les membres d’une grande famille, et ils habitent un côté
de Kearney street; mais les motifs qui les ont fait ainsi s’agglomérer
sont différents; l’antipathie des Américains à l’égard des nègres est
connue et peu dissimulée; le mépris qu’ils leur témoignent a
naturellement porté ces derniers, par les besoins d’une commune défense,
à se réunir entre eux et à ne gêner en rien leurs oppresseurs. La haine
réciproque des deux races qui, chez l’une, est timide, et, chez l’autre,
arrogante, se traduit par l’absence presque complète de relations. Les
noirs sont exclus de tout établissement public fréquenté par leurs
tyrans, tels que les restaurants, les cafés, les théâtres; aussi
n’ont-ils d’autres moyens de montrer leur goût pour la toilette qu’en se
promenant dans les rues, les doigts chargés de bagues, avec des cravates
de soie éblouissantes, et dont la couleur tendre tranche ridiculement
avec leur teint d’ébène; on en rencontre çà et là qui s’étudient à
imiter les manières d’un gentleman, et vous les voyez préoccupés du
lustre de leurs chaussures et s’efforçant à paraître des dandys
parfaits. Tous les efforts de Mme Beecher-Stowe n’ont pu encore les
réhabiliter dans l’esprit des citoyens des États-Unis, auxquels semblent
parfaitement ridicules les sympathies de cette femme généreuse pour la
race noire; et bien que, sur le sol libre, les droits de l’homme leur
soient concédés, leur infériorité sociale est assez marquée pour leur
faire sentir qu’ils n’ont encore véritablement gagné qu’une chose qui,
du reste, a bien son prix, la suppression des coups de fouet. Comme les
Chinois, ils ont ouvert, pour eux seuls des restaurants, des cafés, des
maisons de jeux, et la plupart exercent la profession de coiffeur.

Le restant de la population se compose d’Américains, Français, Anglais,
Allemands, Hollandais, Mexicains, Chiliens, etc., etc.

Jackson street est l’une des rues de San-Francisco la plus curieuse à
voir; elle a gardé, dans toute sa longueur, les constructions primitives
en bois, et ses habitants ont cela de particulier, qu’ils tiennent
presque tous des restaurants-buffets, connus dans le pays sous la
dénomination de _bar_. C’est surtout le soir, à la clarté du gaz, que
ces établissements présentent un coup d’œil extraordinaire; les mineurs,
après une tournée heureuse dans les placers, viennent s’y réunir et s’y
délasser de leur pénible labeur; cet assemblage de gens de différents
pays offre le spectacle le plus étrange; c’est un tumulte de voix
parlant plusieurs langues, une variété de costumes impossibles à
décrire. Les Mexicaines, les Péruviennes, les Chiliennes, les Négresses
et les Chinoises, revêtues de robes à falbalas, sont confondues avec ces
hommes qui boivent ou dansent, en poussant de grands cris de joie et
avec force trépignements de pieds, au son d’une musique infernale. Pour
peu que vous vous arrêtiez devant la porte d’un de ces bouges de
plaisirs, à contempler ces réunions grossières et burlesques, vous ne
tardez pas à être témoin d’une querelle terrible qui s’élève comme une
bourrasque à la suite d’un éclat de rire; de même que l’éclair précède
le coup de tonnerre, la mêlée devient bientôt générale, et vous n’avez
que le temps de vous sauver, car le quartier est troublé pour toute la
soirée; le sang coulera à la suite d’un formidable combat au couteau et
au revolver, dans lequel de nombreuses victimes sont laissées sur le
pavé.

Les maisons de jeux sont en très-grand nombre à San-Francisco. C’est là
encore qu’il est curieux d’observer cette population. Je visitai
l’intérieur de ces établissements et je pus voir, à la lumière des
lustres de cristal, le contraste de toutes ces figures blanches et
bronzées: le mélange de ces sociétés avait réellement un cachet des plus
bizarres. Ainsi, autour de plusieurs rangs de tables tenues par des
banquiers, et devant lesquelles étaient amoncelées des piles d’or, de
monnaies et de lingots, se coudoyaient, se pressaient, se bousculaient,
armés comme des corsaires ou des brigands calabrais, gentlemen, mineurs
et matelots. Chacun pris dans la foule avait son type; mais ce qu’on
remarquait avec étonnement, c’est que la plupart, dans ces réunions,
suivaient un enjeu quelquefois considérable sans qu’aucune passion
réelle se lût sur leur physionomie, tant il est vrai que l’or, en ces
temps de bonne moisson, avait peu de prix aux yeux de ces hommes.
Lorsque ces maisons commencèrent à s’ouvrir, au moment où la fièvre de
l’or régnait dans toute sa force, le jeu engendrait souvent des rixes
violentes, et plus d’une fois, les joueurs trop heureux n’y reçurent
pour payement que la balle d’un pistolet logée dans leur cervelle.

Il fut longtemps question de fermer ces maisons; mais comme le
gouvernement percevait des sommes énormes de celles qu’il tolérait, on
conçoit que ces apparences de morale soient longtemps restées à l’état
de projet.

Les jeux sont variés; ainsi les Mexicains jouent principalement au
_monte_, les Français, au _trente et quarante_, à la _roulette_, au
_vingt-et-un_, au _lansquenet_, et les Américains, au _pharaon_. Je ne
puis oublier la physionomie des individus qui, avec la foule des
joueurs, composent le personnel de ces maisons; le _gambler_ occupe le
premier rang; c’est, autrement dit, le banquier de la table, il la tient
pour son compte ou pour celui d’un autre; dans ce dernier cas, il peut
gagner de huit à douze dollars par soirée; vient ensuite le paillasse,
chaque table en a toujours à ses gages un ou deux; on les voit jouer
sans discontinuer pour mettre la partie en train et amorcer les
visiteurs; ils gagnent quatre à cinq dollars par jour. Les ramasseurs de
morts méritent aussi d’être cités; ils sont en majeure partie
Américains, et cette dénomination leur vient de ce qu’ils s’emparent des
pièces qu’un joueur favorisé par la chance aurait laissées par
inadvertance sur la table. Ces ramasseurs suivent d’un œil vigilant
chaque coup de la partie, et lorsque le banquier annonce une nouvelle
séance, si une pièce semble oubliée ou laissée sur le tapis, une seconde
seulement, par un joueur distrait, un bras s’allonge vivement dans la
foule et va saisir cette pièce, qui passe rapidement de la main au
gousset. Les maisons de jeux foisonnent de ces individus, vivant de la
sorte, au jour le jour; ils emploient mille stratagèmes pour détourner
l’attention d’un novice qui veut tenter la fortune: c’est la plaie des
joueurs non expérimentés; mais il arrive souvent que des rixes terribles
sont la suite de leur fraude éhontée, car un joueur s’apercevant qu’il a
été volé, dans un accès violent, tuera comme un chien un de ces
impudents fripons.

Toutes ces maisons sont pourvues de bons orchestres, dont l’harmonie
fait une agréable diversion avec le son de l’or.

Il est aussi une classe d’individus très-redoutée de la population, et
qui infestent ces lieux de leur présence comme tout autre endroit
public. Je veux parler des hommes connus sous le nom de la _Bande
noire_; ils forment une société d’escrocs américains. Ce sont des
voleurs émérites, fort bien vêtus, exerçant avec la plus complète
impunité leur astucieux métier; s’ils entrent dans un de ces
établissements, ce n’est pas pour perdre leur temps à tenter la fortune;
ils trouvent plus commode de s’emparer de l’or répandu sur les tables et
d’opérer ensuite leur retraite, avec le plus grand sang-froid. Les
spectateurs et le personnel des gamblers sont foudroyés par tant de
hardiesse, mais personne n’ose prendre au collet ces audacieux voleurs.
Ces délits sont déjà depuis longtemps consacrés par la tradition, et le
gouvernement local et la police sont encore dans un tel état d’enfance,
que cette violence d’un petit nombre est tolérée; mais les méfaits
scandaleux commis par les hommes de la Bande noire seraient trop
nombreux à relater ici, s’il fallait en faire un récit complet; il
suffira de dire que les policemen les laissaient agir dès qu’ils
s’étaient fait reconnaître à eux. Chaque jour un commerçant avait à
déplorer des pertes que plusieurs de ces coquins lui avaient fait subir.
S’avisait-il de porter plainte?--ces voleurs cassaient, brisaient tout
chez lui, enfin mettaient sa maison en ruine. Ils mangeaient de leur
autorité privée dans les restaurants, buvaient, consommaient dans tous
ces endroits publics; avec l’audace qui leur était connue, ils
troublaient les réunions par toute sorte d’extravagances, et, bien que
leurs excès eussent cependant diminué d’une manière sensible depuis les
premiers temps, il n’existait encore, en 1852, aucun pouvoir régulier
qui pût sévir contre eux.

A notre arrivée à San-Francisco, nous avions loué, ma sœur et moi, dans
Montgomery-street, une petite chambre meublée que l’on nous fit payer
trois cents francs par mois, ce qui nous semblait assez cher, attendu
que l’eau y filtrait le long des murs et inondait notre lit en temps de
pluie. Nous crûmes d’abord que la vue dont nous jouissions compenserait
un peu la cherté du prix, car cette vue s’étendait sur la plus grande
partie de la ville et des montagnes environnantes; mais peu de jours
après, nous nous aperçûmes que nos fenêtres faisaient face à la maison
d’un boulanger choisi par le comité de vigilance pour y établir son
tribunal. Une corde enroulée sur une poulie fixée au premier étage était
l’emblème de cette Thémis simple et sommaire, connue sous le nom de loi
de _Lynch_. Un matin que je m’étais éveillée de bonne heure, je
m’approchai de celle de mes fenêtres qui donnait sur la rue, et j’allais
l’ouvrir lorsque mes yeux s’arrêtèrent avec effroi sur la maison qui me
faisait face: deux hommes étaient montés sur des échelles et
s’occupaient à la hâte de fixer à la poulie dont j’ai parlé une corde
neuve et démesurément longue. Je ne devinai que trop la scène terrible
qui allait se passer. A ce moment, des rumeurs lointaines commençaient à
se faire entendre. Ne voulant pas être spectatrice de cette exécution,
j’entraînai ma sœur, et nous sortîmes de la maison par une porte de
derrière; un quart d’heure après nous étions dans la campagne: nous
passâmes la journée chez des amis. Je sus bientôt que le coupable que la
foule entraînait à grands cris était un Espagnol accusé d’assassinat. Ce
tableau funèbre me fit une impression si horrible que ce jour même je
m’occupai d’un autre logement. Cette terrible loi de Lynch, dont j’étais
peu soucieuse de voir les fréquentes rigueurs, doit son nom à un
individu nommé Lynch, qui en fut la première victime. On concevra
facilement quelles fatales et nombreuses erreurs doit entraîner cet
exercice illégal de la justice.




CHAPITRE III

     Sacramento.--Le fort Sutter.--Indiens
     nomades.--Mary’s-ville.--Shasta-City.--Rencontre d’un
     ours.--Weaverville.--Les mineurs.--Les montagnes
     Rocheuses.--Yreka.--Retour à San-Francisco.


Après une année passée à San-Francisco, je voulus voir l’intérieur de la
Californie; je commençai par visiter Sacramento, qui est construite sur
la rive gauche du fleuve; cette ville de second ordre comptait déjà à
cette époque de vingt à trente mille âmes. L’importance de son commerce
est considérable; c’est l’entrepôt où s’écoulent les deux tiers des
marchandises qui débarquent à San-Francisco. Comme cette dernière,
Sacramento est bâtie moitié en briques, moitié en planches. Mais son
climat est tout différent. Les chaleurs y sont plus fortes; ses
alentours, rendus marécageux par suite du débordement de la rivière,
produisent de terribles fièvres; à l’époque de la crue des eaux, ces
plaines fertiles ressemblent à d’immenses lacs. Les chercheurs d’or
firent d’abord irruption dans cette contrée malsaine, et beaucoup y
trouvèrent la mort; aussi fut-elle abandonnée après les premières
fouilles, qui seules furent productives.

Lorsqu’on veut se rendre à Mary’s-ville sans remonter la rivière, on
prend une diligence; elles sont assez bien suspendues, mais ces routes
sont si mauvaises, que les cahots sont fréquents. A vingt milles du
chemin, l’on aperçoit le fort _Sutter_ gardé par une tribu d’Indiens.
Ces bandes nomades sont curieuses à observer; lorsque, par les fenêtres
d’une diligence, on les voit s’avancer en troupeaux à travers les
plaines, le contraste entre la vie sauvage et la vie civilisée fait que
vous examinez avec plus d’intérêt leur bizarre accoutrement. Dans une
halte que nous fîmes, j’eus l’occasion d’approcher de ces Indiens, et ce
ne fut pas sans curiosité que je détaillai quelques-unes de leurs
physionomies. La plupart d’entre eux n’expriment aucune intelligence;
ils ont le teint d’un jaune foncé, un front bas, le nez plat, des
cheveux noirs et abondants qui descendent presque à la naissance des
sourcils; les yeux un peu ronds et noirs, et leur regard, quand il n’est
pas empreint de mécontentement, a l’expression étonnée du regard de
l’enfant. Leur costume se compose de peaux de bêtes et de morceaux
d’étoffes voyantes à dessins bizarres; ils portent en outre des
vêtements qu’ils ramassent sur les chemins, et presque tous se couvrent
de ces débris de la manière la plus grotesque; leurs bras et leur cou
sont chargés de colliers, de bracelets, de coquillages, de verroteries,
et jusqu’à des boutons, enfilés dans des bouts de ficelle; ils sont, du
reste, malgré leur goût pour les ornements, d’une saleté répugnante. Ils
habitent des huttes qui ont la forme d’un dôme; elles sont bâties avec
de la terre et des branches d’arbres: une seule ouverture carrée et
basse les laisse pénétrer à l’intérieur en rampant sur leurs genoux. Ils
vivent là pêle-mêle, hommes, femmes, enfants et chiens, se nourrissant
du produit de leurs chasses et de poissons, entre autres, de saumons
pêchés dans la rivière de la _Trinité_; ils les font sécher pour leur
saison d’hiver.

Ces Indiens ne mangent pas de viande fraîche; ils attendent qu’elle soit
corrompue pour la faire cuire; ils préparent leur pain avec des glands
de chêne; ces glands sont d’abord séchés et mis en poudre; ils font
ensuite une pâte qu’ils cuisent simplement dans l’eau; ils mêlent aussi
à leur nourriture des sauterelles et quantité d’insectes.

On rencontre aussi sur la route qui mène à Mary’s-ville, de ces
indigènes que l’irruption des peuples civilisés a refoulés avec leurs
instincts sauvages vers les régions désertes; cependant, bon nombre
d’entre eux, attirés par la curiosité et cet amour du lucre qui est
commun à la race humaine, ont fini par pénétrer dans les villes et se
mettre en relation avec les nouveaux venus qui, insensiblement, les ont
amenés à travailler dans les _ranchos_ (fermes). D’autres sont restés en
guerre ouverte, et des expéditions américaines ont été dirigées contre
eux dans les reconnaissances qui étaient faites de certains points
inexplorés du sol californien.

Au bout de huit heures de trajet, on arrive à Mary’s-ville, après avoir
subi bien des fatigues sur les mauvais chemins qui y conduisent et avoir
passé à gué plusieurs rivières.

Mary’s-ville est construite en bois, sauf quelques maisons qui sont en
briques; elle est située sur les bords verdoyants de la _Yuba_; mais,
sur ces rives enchantées, la chaleur est plus accablante et les fièvres
sont plus terribles encore qu’à Sacramento; cette ville offre l’aspect
d’un immense bazar destiné à alimenter les placers et les petits
villages environnants.

C’est dans cette ville que m’arriva une aventure qui faillit me coûter
la vie, à l’hôtel même où la diligence descendait tous les voyageurs.
Nous étions à dîner, ma sœur, une autre dame et son mari; notre repas
terminé, nous nous apprêtions à quitter la maison, lorsque nous
entendîmes un affreux tapage; le maître de l’établissement, interrogé
sur la cause de ce bruit, nous répondit qu’il était produit par une
réunion de gentlemen de la ville. Comme nous étions au fait des mœurs
américaines, la chose ne nous surprit en aucune façon; seulement, nous
hâtâmes nos préparatifs de départ, afin de pouvoir nous échapper avant
que les manifestations bachiques de ces messieurs se fussent produites
plus à découvert, et afin aussi de profiter d’un clair de lune superbe
pour nous remettre en marche; il n’y avait pas de temps à perdre, car
déjà un bruit formidable d’assiettes et de verres brisés présageait une
de ces redoutables fins de repas américains bien capables, certes, de
désespérer les sociétés de tempérance; mais la bonne intention que nous
avions de ne pas sortir sans payer nous porta malheur. Au moment où le
maître de l’hôtel nous rendait noire monnaie, l’escalier qui conduisait
à la pièce où se donnait le repas retentit du bruit de gens avinés qui
roulaient plutôt qu’ils ne descendaient, au milieu d’un grand tumulte de
cris et de vociférations. Nous cherchâmes à nous esquiver
précipitamment, mais alors une mêlée s’engagea entre ces hommes armés de
revolvers, et je me trouvai, sans trop savoir comment, séparée de mes
compagnons. Au même instant, un coup de feu retentit, et le sifflement
d’une balle vient effleurer ma chevelure; chacun de se sauver, de fuir
dans toutes les directions, je veux fuir comme tout le monde, mais au
moment de franchir le seuil de la porte, un nouveau coup de feu succède
au premier, il vient frapper un individu qui tombe devant moi; effrayée
à juste titre, je sors en courant, et ne sachant au juste où je
dirigeais mes pas, au point que je fus quelque temps à retrouver mes
amis. Ils étaient dans la plus grande inquiétude; ils me croyaient
blessée, mais, Dieu merci, j’en était quitte pour la peur. Nous apprîmes
bientôt que le meurtrier, dans son ivresse, avait ajusté un individu de
sa bande, lequel s’était esquivé du côté où je me trouvais; le premier
coup dirigé sur lui avait failli m’atteindre, et le second n’avait pu
être évité par ce malheureux, qui avait reçu la balle dans l’aiselle
gauche.

Le costume d’homme dont j’étais revêtue et la nuit presque noire où nous
étions avaient contribué à tromper l’assassin; enfin, je l’avais échappé
belle! Peut-être n’est-il pas hors de propos de donner la description du
costume que je portais dans ces excursions et d’expliquer pourquoi je
l’avais adopté. Il se composait d’un feutre gris de forme légère, d’un
paletot de voyage proportionné à ma taille, de bottes à l’écuyère: telle
est la mode en Californie. A ces bottes était adaptée une paire
d’éperons à la mexicaine pour les mules dont on se sert fréquemment
dans le pays; puis, des gants de daim et une ceinture en cuir pour
mettre l’or, et dans laquelle était passé un poignard. Ce costume, assez
pittoresque pour une femme, lui est de toute nécessité dans ces voyages
à travers des contrées abruptes; il lui laisse, dans un moment de
danger, une plus grande liberté de mouvement qu’elle n’en aurait sous
des habits habituels. Jusqu’alors, je n’avais eu qu’à me louer de cette
idée de dissimuler mon sexe; mais cette fois, il faut l’avouer, j’avais
failli être punie bien sévèrement de ma témérité.

Comme on a pu en juger par le récit qui précède, l’ivresse, chez les
Américains, offre les caractères de la folie la plus furieuse; dans
leurs excès d’intempérance, ils dédaignent le vin; l’abus qu’ils font de
l’eau de vie, du wiskey, du genièvre, de l’absinthe et des autres
liqueurs fortes, produit chez eux cette exaltation de forcenés qui les
rend si dangereux. Les vapeurs alcooliques qui leur montent au cerveau y
font presque toujours germer des idées sanguinaires, et il n’est pas
rare de voir des hommes d’un naturel paisible, dès que l’ivresse s’en
est emparée, commettre des meurtres qui leur feraient horreur s’ils
avaient leur raison.

_Shasta-City_, en se dirigeant vers le Nord, est une des plus petites
villes de la Californie; elle est moins étendue que certains villages de
la France; elle n’a à proprement parler, qu’une seule rue qui la
traverse dans toute sa longueur, composée de chaque côté de maisons en
bois, située à quelque distance de la _Sierra-Nevada_. Elle
approvisionnait autrefois les riches placers environnants qui se sont,
comme dans certaines parties de la Californie, vite épuisés; mais elle
est restée un lieu de passage important par sa situation; c’est là que
s’arrête le parcours des diligences, et, si l’on veut pousser au delà,
on peut louer à _Shasta-City_ ou acheter des mules qui vous
transportent, avec vos bagages, à travers les petits chemins sinueux des
montagnes.

Notre passage en cette ville devait être signalé par un de ces sinistres
si communs en Californie: à peine arrivés, nous fûmes témoins d’un
immense incendie qui dévora, en moins d’une heure, la plus grande partie
de la ville, et au moment de notre départ, nous eûmes le spectacle,
encore plus triste, de voir les malheureux habitants qui cherchaient, au
milieu des ruines fumantes, le moindre vestige de leurs biens.

Lorsqu’on a quitté _Shasta-City_, en remontant vers le nord, comme pour
gagner _l’Orégon_, on traverse une contrée montagneuse qui sert de
repaire à d’énormes ours couleur fauve; l’un d’eux me causa une frayeur
dont je me souviendrai toujours. Je m’étais attardée à la suite de mes
compagnons; la mule qui me portait avait insensiblement ralenti son pas,
et je ne songeais nullement à activer sa marche, me laissant aller à une
somnolence causée par la fatigue et l’extrême chaleur du jour; tout à
coup, j’aperçus à vingt pas de moi un ours de haute taille qui
débouchait d’un fourré en balançant sa tête avec une tranquille
assurance; il semblait vouloir traverser la route où je cheminais. Ma
frayeur fut telle en découvrant cet animal, que je ne pus même pas
pousser un cri d’alarme; les rênes s’échappèrent de mes mains, mes yeux
se fixèrent sur ceux de l’ours avec stupeur; le sang me monta au
cerveau, et je restai comme frappée de paralysie; mais il se contenta
de se rouler au milieu du chemin sans même daigner prendre garde à moi
et à ma monture, qui trahissait pourtant notre présence par le bruit de
ses clochettes. J’arrivais heureusement à un coude que faisait la route
et qui permettait d’apercevoir mes compagnons; leur vue me réveilla en
me rendant quelque courage, et, sans plus me fier à l’apparente
générosité de l’hôte des montagnes, j’enfonçai mes éperons dans les
flancs de ma mule, et j’eus bientôt rejoint mes amis, auxquels je fis le
récit de cette courte mais poignante impression de voyage. Et maintenant
que j’écris ces lignes, je suis portée à croire que ce cruel animal
avait dû faire un copieux déjeuner, puisqu’il laissait échapper la belle
occasion de me dévorer. Quelques personnes verront sans doute dans sa
manière d’agir à mon égard le fait d’un animal repu de sang, mais la
reconnaissance me fait un devoir de ne pas passer sous silence sa
généreuse conduite.

Avant d’arriver à Weaverville, où nous avions le dessein de faire une
halte, on rencontre la rivière de la Trinité, sur les bords de laquelle
s’étaient engagés de terribles combats lorsqu’il fallut repousser les
Indiens et devenir maître des travaux qui devaient bientôt bouleverser
le pays en tout sens. Après l’avoir passé à gué, nous tenant à genoux
sur nos mules qui avaient de l’eau jusqu’à mi-corps, nous arrivâmes sur
le plateau qui domine la ville. Weaverville est enfouie au milieu des
montagnes, dont les sommets les plus élevés sont couverts de neige,
quelle que soit la saison. La situation de ses maisonnettes, au pied des
montagnes plantées de sapins, lui donne assez l’aspect de certains
villages des Alpes; comme eux elle respire une tranquillité agreste qui
fait contraste avec l’activité fiévreuse de San-Francisco et de
Sacramento. De plus, l’air y est pur et les fièvres y sont inconnues,
aussi la richesse aurifère de cette contrée y attire-t-elle chaque jour
grand nombre de travailleurs. Le transport des lettres et de l’or se
fait par le service d’express.

Nous séjournâmes quelque temps dans cette paisible localité, qui
semblait n’avoir été troublée par aucun événement lugubre. Un jour que
je me promenais sur les bas-côtés de la ville, j’arrivai sur un terrain
abandonné où s’élèvent deux croix de bois, peintes en noir, comme dans
les cimetières; elles occupaient seules l’emplacement qui paraissait
avoir été jadis habité; fort curieuse de ma nature, je demandai à
quelques personnes du voisinage l’explication de ces signes funèbres, et
voici à peu près ce qui me fut raconté.

Dans la première ou la seconde année qui suivit la découverte de l’or en
Californie, alors qu’il n’existait encore aucun gouvernement établi, les
premiers mineurs qui pénétrèrent dans la région de Weaverville durent,
en l’absence de tout pouvoir public qui pût les protéger, garder
eux-même leur personne et le terrain qu’ils s’étaient choisi. Ils
vivaient là dans la plus complète indépendance, ne payant aucun impôt et
résolus à défendre, à l’aide du revolver, leurs propriétés contre toute
agression. Quand le gouvernement américain vit que l’émigration affluait
de tous les points du globe, il sentit la nécessité de donner une
organisation politique à cet État nouveau, il dut rendre la mesure
générale. Or, un shérif se présenta à Weaverville pour y faire exécuter
les lois qui s’établissaient sur tous les points de la Californie; il
imposait à chaque mineur l’obligation de payer une taxe pour avoir le
droit d’exercer son métier. On comprend ce que ces nouvelles
ordonnances durent rencontrer d’oppositions; l’un de ces mineurs,
Irlandais de nation, était un des premiers qui avait pénétré dans les
montagnes de Weaverville; aux premières sommations que lui fit le shérif
d’ouvrir sa maison pour qu’on pût procéder à l’enquête, il répondit
qu’il était décidé à défendre son foyer à main armée, jusqu’à ce que de
plus amples informations lui eussent garanti le caractère officiel dont
se disait investi l’homme qui se présentait alors à lui comme un
agresseur. Le shérif, homme d’une sauvage énergie, qui avait servi dans
les expéditions contre les Indiens, répondit par un coup de revolver qui
étendit raide mort le malheureux mineur sur le seuil de sa porte; la
femme, en voulant défendre son mari, partagea le même sort. A partir de
ce moment, la taxe fut perçue sans difficulté. On rasa la maison, et les
victimes furent enterrées sur l’emplacement où les deux croix servent à
perpétuer ce triste souvenir des commencements de Weaverville.

Les Irlandais sont en grand nombre parmi les mineurs de la Californie. A
trois milles de Weaverville, il existe un groupe de maisonnettes qu’on
appelle _Sidney_, exclusivement occupées par des gens de cette nation.

J’eus aussi l’occasion d’aller visiter quelques Indiens qu’on avait
faits prisonniers tout récemment et que l’on gardait à vue sur un
terrain peu éloigné de la ville où ils s’étaient dressé des huttes,
comme au fond de leurs forêts; ils avaient été pris à la suite d’une
expédition faite pour venger la mort d’un marchand américain qui s’était
égaré dans les régions habitées par des peuplades sauvages et avait été
massacré. Ces malheureux, attaqués à l’improviste dans leur retraite,
expiaient peut-être le crime des vrais coupables. Il se trouvait parmi
eux un vieillard fort âgé, qui semblait devoir empirer d’un moment à
l’autre; il se tourna avec effort et me montra sur sa poitrine une large
et très-profonde blessure produite par une balle. A quelques pas de lui,
était une jeune Indienne dans un état de prostration dont rien ne
pouvait la distraire; une grossière couverture l’enveloppait; elle avait
l’un des poignets brisé par une balle; à son attitude, on l’aurait crue
morte; mais le regard s’arrêtait bientôt sur sa physionomie, empreinte
d’une fierté sauvage; ses traits étaient d’une pureté admirable; ses
grands yeux noirs, étincelants, vous regardaient avec un air étrange
sans exprimer le moindre sentiment de douleur.

Deux chiens de ces contrées, et qu’on appelle _Coyottes_, avaient suivi
les prisonniers dans leur captivité; cette espèce de chiens errants vit
par bandes comme les Indiens; ils ont les pattes courtes, le poil ras et
de couleur fauve, le museau effilé comme celui d’un renard; on les
rencontre en grand nombre dans le nord de l’_Orégon_; il faut que la
faim les presse fort pour qu’ils s’approchent des villes ou des ranch,
en poussant des hurlements plaintifs; leur naturel est, du reste, peu
féroce, car ils se sauvent à la vue d’un homme. Je vis encore plusieurs
femmes occupées à préparer la nourriture et à soigner les enfants, comme
chez les nations civilisées, les hommes de ces tribus nomades
abandonnent aux femmes les soins du ménage.

Nous offrîmes aux prisonniers indiens quelques pièces de gibier, deux
écureuils gris et trois tourterelles dont on fait, en Californie, des
repas délicieux; nos offrandes furent accueillies avec plaisir, et les
femmes nous donnèrent en échange quelques-uns des colliers de
coquillages qu’elles portent à leur cou.

La petite place de Weaverville est le centre de nombreux placers; elle
fournit aux mineurs, outre les provisions, les ustensiles et outils
nécessaires à leurs travaux. La terre de cette partie montagneuse d’une
couleur jaunâtre, est reconnue pour une des plus aurifères de la
Californie; il est véritablement peu d’endroits où le mineur, à la
recherche d’un _claim_ (portion de terre qu’il s’est choisie), ne trouve
à utiliser sa pioche et son plat en fer-blanc. Cet appareil lui sert à
laver les lingots et à en détacher avec de l’eau la couche terreuse qui
les enveloppe; dès les premiers coups de pioche et après le lavage du
premier plat, il sait à quoi s’en tenir sur le terrain qu’il veut
exploiter, parce qu’il sait combien de plats de terre il peut laver dans
une journée. De grands travaux ont été entrepris au milieu des montagnes
pour détourner, au profit d’un canal creusé à travers les placers, le
cours de la Trinité qui passe à vingt milles de Weaverville; mais faute
de capitaux, ils furent abandonnés par les compagnies qui en avaient
l’exploitation. Les mines du Sud sont beaucoup plus pauvres en métal
que celles du Nord: aussi la masse des travailleurs s’est-elle portée
vers ce dernier côté.

Il y a deux saisons bien distinctes pour le travail des mines: l’une
commence au mois de novembre, au moment des pluies, et l’autre après la
fonte des neiges, c’est-à-dire en avril ou mai. Si tous les placers
avaient de l’eau en abondance, on aurait extrait plus d’or de la
Californie, et les mineurs n’auraient pas à souffrir la misère pendant
les temps de sécheresse.

Les bénéfices des mineurs dépendent de la veine qu’ils poursuivent: les
uns gagnent cinq piastres par jour; les autres, plus favorisés,
travaillent sur un _claim_ qui leur rapporte jusqu’à dix, douze piastres
et plus. Il en est enfin auxquels le hasard fait découvrir un terrain
non encore exploité, et qui s’enrichissent en très-peu de temps: ceux-là
sont les élus du sort; mais ceux dont on ne parle pas, ce sont les
malheureux qui ont abandonné leur famille et leur patrie dans l’espoir
de réaliser en peu d’années leurs rêves de fortune; arrivés les
derniers, ils n’ont souvent plus trouvé que des terrains épuisés dont le
produit ne suffit même pas à les faire vivre. La misère et le
découragement sont les seuls fruits qu’ils retirent de leur rude et
ingrat labeur. Dieu veuille que les choses aient changé!

Il est curieux de rencontrer un chercheur d’or en voyage, c’est-à-dire
passant d’un placer à l’autre. Il porte toute une panoplie d’ustensiles
dont il ne peut se séparer dans la rude existence des mines; il est
d’abord vêtu de grandes bottes de cuir capables de résister aux plus
dures intempéries, d’une chemise de laine, espèce de vareuse semblable à
celles des matelots; sa tête est couverte d’un feutre qui n’a plus de
forme, tellement il est usé et cassé; à sa ceinture, à gauche, pend son
_knife bovie_ (couteau à bœuf), à droite un revolver; il porte sur son
épaule la pioche qui lui sert à faire des entailles dans la terre; sur
son dos, un fusil en bandoulière, une couverture de laine enroulée, une
marmite et son plat de fer-blanc.

Le terme de notre excursion était Yreka, situé au nord de la Californie.
Avant d’y arriver, nous passâmes par une longue chaîne de montagnes,
coupée par des chemins sinueux et escarpés, où les mules seules peuvent
tenir pied. Nous rencontrâmes une caravane de ces pauvres bêtes
chargées de marchandises, et que des muletiers conduisaient. Nous
reconnûmes leur approche par le son des clochettes qu’elles portent à
leur cou, et dont les différents timbres produisent une harmonie
étrange. Elles commençaient ainsi que nous à gravir ces gigantesques
montagnes Rocheuses. Qui n’a pas vu ces chemins tortueux, raboteux, sans
aucune trace dans le roc, ne peut avoir la plus simple idée des
difficultés, des dangers qu’il y a à les parcourir. Nous nous trouvâmes
après plusieurs heures de marche au-dessus d’abîmes si profonds, qu’ils
nous eussent donné le vertige si notre regard eût osé en sonder la
profondeur. Nous avancions lentement en suivant la ligne étroite d’un
sentier qui ne permettait qu’à une personne ou à une mule de passer à la
fois. Si le pied manquait, on roulait infailliblement avec elle à plus
de deux ou trois mille pieds. Les sombres vapeurs qui nous
enveloppaient, le sentiment du danger que nous courions au moindre faux
pas, l’éloignement de toute habitation, tout remplissait mon âme d’une
sorte de crainte religieuse. On tente quelquefois vainement de prier
dans une église; la prière vient d’elle-même au bord des lèvres dans
ces lieux d’une effrayante majesté.

Nous traversâmes une bonne partie de ces montagnes Rocheuses dont
l’accès était devenu de plus en plus difficile par suite de l’énorme
quantité de neige qui encombrait les chemins. Nous pûmes voir sur notre
passage la marque des pieds des ours gris, et, dans les excavations des
rochers, des carcasses qui témoignent de leur voracité. Des traces de
sang, encore fraîches sur la neige, attestaient même qu’ils nous avaient
précédés de peu de temps, et qu’ils s’étaient sans doute enfuis avec
leur proie au fond de leurs tanières.

A plusieurs milles de là, pressés par la fatigue, nous fîmes une halte
chez des Américains qui avaient construit une hutte au milieu des
neiges; je les pris d’abord pour des brigands; ce n’était que des
aubergistes, qui nous vendirent, au poids de l’or, des côtelettes
d’ours; elles nous semblèrent fort appétissantes; j’en avais déjà mangé
à San-Francisco.

Entre ces montagnes Rocheuses et l’Orégon, on rencontre de belles
plaines qui, en été, offrent l’aspect de la plus riche végétation, de
vastes prairies émaillées de fleurs, des chênes gigantesques. Cette
nature encore vierge est cultivée par des émigrants dont la plupart sont
venus de l’intérieur des États-Unis à travers les plaines;
l’agglomération de tous ces laboureurs dans la Californie septentrionale
rendit la place d’Yreka plus importante, comme centre d’affaires, que
Weaverville et Shasta-City. Elle devint un lieu de passage où les
voyageurs des plaines vinrent s’alimenter et faire les achats
nécessaires aux établissements situés dans les environs; mais aussi, à
mesure que la population européenne et américaine s’augmentait, elle
avait de plus en plus à veiller à sa sûreté personnelle. Les Indiens,
que les envahissements d’agriculteurs refoulaient sans cesse, gardaient
contre les nouveaux venus un profond ressentiment de se voir déplacés
d’une contrée qu’ils habitaient depuis un temps immémorial; il fallait
se tenir continuellement en garde contre leurs attaques nocturnes. Lors
de mon arrivée à Yreka, on parlait encore d’affreux ravages causés tout
récemment par des tribus indiennes: des incendies avaient dévoré, sur
différents points, des fermes entières, et l’on avait trouvé leurs
habitants cruellement massacrés pendant la nuit par la main des
sauvages.

Yreka n’est qu’à quinze milles de l’Orégon; nous y arrivâmes en novembre
1853.

Les maisons de la ville sont encore presque toutes en bois, même son
plus bel hôtel. Il existe des maisons de jeu, comme dans toutes les
villes qui ont un placer pour voisinage. On peut goûter de la cuisine
française au restaurant Lafayette qui est le plus confortable
établissement de ce genre. Cependant, malgré la tendance au bien-être
matériel, il était encore difficile, en 1853, à un voyageur, d’y trouver
toutes ses aises; les matelas y étaient complétement inconnus; il
fallait, bon gré mal gré, coucher sur des paillasses.

Les froids furent si rigoureux pendant l’année où je visitai cette
ville, qu’il ne se passa pas de jour sans que je ne visse ramener à
Yreka des gens qu’on avait trouvés gelés dans la campagne. Le pain, la
viande avaient tellement durci sous cette température glaciale, qu’on
était réduit à les fendre à coups de hache et de marteau.

Les mines y sont aussi très-productives; mais l’absence de l’eau s’y
faisait sentir, comme en d’autres localités, à certaines époques de
l’année.

Après y avoir séjourné deux mois et demi pour nos affaires de commerce
et nous être défaits heureusement de nos marchandises, nous retournâmes,
ma sœur et moi, à San-Francisco. Ce voyage, des plus fatigants, nous
avait été fort pénible, et nous avions le désir de nous établir à
San-Francisco.




CHAPITRE IV

     Incendie.--Départ pour la Chine.--_L’Arturo._--Une malade à
     bord.--Les sorciers chinois.--Mort.--Les mers de la Chine.--Une
     voie d’eau.--Arrivée à Hong-Kong.--Visite au consul.--Voyage à
     Canton.--Insurrection chinoise.


Après dix-huit mois passés en Californie, pendant lesquels j’éprouvais
tour à tour des chances de prospérité aussi bien que des déboires réels,
je pris un parti téméraire. Dans le courant de l’année, je m’étais liée
avec une artiste, nommée Mme Nelson. Cette dame avait formé le projet
de quitter la Californie pour se rendre à Batavia. Des lettres
pressantes l’invitaient à se rendre dans ce pays pour y donner pendant
six mois des représentations; elle m’engagea à l’accompagner, m’offrant
les bénéfices d’une spéculation qui devait mettre notre voyage à
profit; nous devions nous arrêter en Chine, et là faire une pacotille de
tous objets propres à revendre à notre retour. J’hésitai longtemps à
entreprendre cette longue traversée, lorsqu’une catastrophe, trop
fréquente à San-Francisco, vint me décider entièrement. Le feu se
déclara une belle nuit dans la maison voisine de celle que j’habitais
avec ma sœur; l’incendie prit en un instant de telles proportions, qu’il
ne fallut songer qu’à se sauver. Réveillées en sursaut, nous n’eûmes que
le temps de nous habiller à la hâte et de jeter pêle-mêle des vêtements
et des valeurs dans des malles qu’on faisait ensuite passer par les
fenêtres. Enfin, l’intensité du feu devint telle, qu’il nous fallut
descendre les escaliers quatre à quatre sans même prendre le temps de
nous chausser. Nous n’étions pas à vingt pas que le corps de logis,
construit en bois, s’embrasa et s’abîma en moins de dix minutes. Trois
heures plus tard, on comptait cinquante-deux maisons détruites de fond
en comble. Ce feu nous emportait plus de quatre mille piastres. Aucune
des marchandises de notre _store_ n’avait pu être sauvée.

Ma sœur, assez démoralisée par ce revers inattendu, résolut de retourner
à Yreka, où l’on nous disait que le commerce allait fort bien. Quant à
moi, je pris le parti de suivre Mme Nelson, car, outre l’avantage
pécuniaire que je croyais retirer de ce voyage, j’étais dévorée du désir
de voir des pays nouveaux.

Notre itinéraire fut décidé de la manière suivante: nous devions nous
diriger d’abord vers la Chine, et, après avoir passé à Canton, Macao et
Hong-Kong, gagner en dernier lieu Batavia. Dès que tous ces projets
furent arrêtés, nous fîmes nos préparatifs de départ.

Or, le 11 juin 1854, nous nous rendîmes à bord de _l’Arturo_, navire
anglais, en partance pour la Chine. Par un hasard singulier, il y avait,
comme passagers, quatre artistes français: un chanteur, une chanteuse,
un pianiste et un violoniste qui allaient à Calcutta. Ils faisaient,
comme nous, un circuit, et comptaient donner des concerts sur leur
passage dans les différentes villes où ils s’arrêteraient. De plus, dans
l’entrepont, trente-cinq Chinois qui regagnaient leur patrie.

Quinze jours après notre départ, nous dépassions les îles Sandwich.
Vers cette époque, Mme Nelson, qui s’était bien portée jusqu’alors,
devint mélancolique et souffrante. Pour la distraire de son malaise, je
lui proposai de nous faire tirer la bonne aventure par deux Chinois qui
parlaient un peu anglais. Ils avaient des prétentions à l’infaillibilité
dans l’art de la chiromancie. La curiosité m’était venue de mettre leur
science à l’épreuve, en voyant le second du bord éclater d’un fou rire
en les écoutant. Le plus difficile était de décider ces magots à nous
approcher; je fis tant qu’ils vinrent auprès de nous. Mme Nelson leur
tendit la main avec un certain air de raillerie et d’incrédulité; ces
deux Chinois examinèrent avec attention cette main mignonne et blanche;
et fixant tour à tour les yeux sur son visage ils s’interrogeaient entre
eux sur les lignes qu’ils découvraient. Cette consultation durait depuis
un moment et cela commençait à nous impatienter, car ils ne nous
parlaient pas. Croyant qu’ils se moquaient de nous, nous les pressâmes
de s’expliquer, mais ils gardèrent le silence. Mon amie leur demanda
alors en souriant s’ils n’étaient pas sûrs de leur prétendue science.
L’un d’eux répondit qu’ils se taisaient, crainte de l’affliger. «Vous
avez tort, leur dit-elle, car je n’y crois pas.» Je ne sais si cette
parole les mécontenta, mais ils se mirent à lui tirer le plus triste
horoscope. «Vous avez été très-riche, lui dirent-ils (et cela était
vrai), mais il est inutile de chercher à le devenir davantage, car vous
n’avez que très-peu de temps à vivre.»

Mme Nelson parut frappée de cette prédiction et, à partir de ce
moment, elle tomba dans une tristesse qu’il me fut impossible de
dissiper. Je me reprochai presque, comme une mauvaise pensée, de l’avoir
engagée à consulter l’avenir. Néanmoins, je voulus à mon tour connaître
mon sort, et je tendis bravement la main gauche. Le second horoscope
parut les dédommager du premier, ils me dirent que j’avais des lignes
très-heureuses; qu’un jour je deviendrais riche, mais très-riche.
Cependant, leur visage prit tout à coup une expression sérieuse en se
montrant un signe sur mon front, qui n’était certainement visible que
pour eux; il indiquait qu’un jour il m’arriverait un grand malheur,
mais..., car il y avait un mais, que pourtant cela ne ferait point
obstacle à ma future prospérité. Je ris de leurs prédictions qui
m’avaient déjà été faites par des somnambules, et j’essayai, par des
plaisanteries, de ramener quelque gaieté dans le cœur de ma pauvre amie.

Le lendemain de ce jour, Mme Nelson fut plus triste et plus
souffrante encore; elle dessina, néanmoins, au crayon, le portrait des
deux Chinois et le leur donna pour les remercier, ce qui leur causa une
véritable joie.

Huit jours après la scène que je viens de raconter, Mme Nelson était
dans un état de santé des plus alarmants, elle était prise de douleurs
rhumatismales articulaires, et il n’y avait aucun médecin à bord.

Un des Chinois qui avait tiré notre horoscope vint offrir au capitaine,
pour la malade, quelques pilules dont, comme docteur (car il paraît
qu’il était docteur), il avait expérimenté l’usage dans son pays. Ces
pilules étaient rouges et de la grosseur d’une tête d’épingle; elles
avaient la vertu, disait-il, de guérir la plupart des maladies; leur
effet dépendait surtout des quantités bien ordonnées. Les passagers
français et moi, nous crûmes qu’il valait mieux nous fier à la science
médicale des Chinois que de laisser Mme Nelson mourir sans secours.
On essaya alors de lui faire prendre douze de ces pilules; mais elle
nous questionna, et nous eûmes l’imprudence de lui dire que le remède
qu’on lui proposait avait été prescrit par un Chinois. Oh! alors elle
s’opposa obstinément à nos instances, tant le souvenir de l’affreuse
prédiction qui lui avait été faite pesait sur son esprit. La résistance
qu’elle apportait à nos soins nous mit au désespoir. Nous la suppliâmes
à mains jointes de céder à nos prières; elle y consentit enfin et prit
six de ces pilules, mais il fut impossible de lui faire accepter le
reste. Hélas! soit que ce remède, dans l’efficacité duquel nous avions
foi, lui fût administré trop tard, soit qu’il lui fût contraire, la
maladie qui devait la tuer fit, à compter de ce moment, de rapides
progrès; un violent délire s’empara d’elle, pendant lequel elle
s’écriait à chaque instant: «Les Chinois! oh! les Chinois!» Bientôt un
hoquet, avant-coureur de la mort, vint nous terrifier tous. Nous vîmes
cette pauvre femme, jeune encore et pleine d’intelligence, se débattre
dans les convulsions de l’agonie. Je m’approchai de son lit de douleurs,
j’attirai sur ma poitrine, avec un saint respect, ce visage amaigri par
la souffrance, et j’y déposai le baiser de l’adieu suprême. Ses
paupières appesanties et mi-closes se relevèrent par un dernier effort;
elle me sourit doucement, comme pour me remercier, puis son corps se
raidit sous mon étreinte, et le dernier souffle de sa vie, s’exhalant de
ses lèvres livides, glissa le long de mon visage.

Dans la même nuit, et par ordre du capitaine, les matelots
transportèrent son corps au milieu du pont; tout le monde se rangea
autour et l’on récita la prière des morts. La cérémonie achevée, le
cadavre fut enveloppé dans un drap avec un boulet aux pieds, puis on le
glissa dans la mer par-dessus le bord. Le bruit sourd produit par sa
chute retentit dans le cœur de chacun de nous; tout était fini.

La mort prématurée de Mme Nelson me fit un mal si poignant que je
demeurai plusieurs jours dans une prostration complète; les pensées les
plus sombres venaient en foule m’assaillir, car j’éprouvai à ce moment
la cruelle douleur de l’isolement, je me vis livrée à tous les hasards,
loin de ma patrie, de ma famille, et je maudis le jour où m’était venue
la fatale inspiration de quitter la terre natale. Ma situation présente
me parut être une punition du ciel et un mauvais présage. Que
pouvais-je seule dans l’avenir, sans un conseil, sans une voix amie,
dans la nouvelle route que je m’étais tracée? que n’aurais-je pas donné
pour retourner en arrière! mais je ne pouvais arrêter le navire qui
m’emportait à pleines voiles; je dus subir ma destinée!

       *       *       *       *       *

Les mers de la Chine sont parsemées de récifs qui rendent la navigation
extrêmement périlleuse dans cette partie du monde; cependant, nous
dépassâmes, par un temps superbe, les Bacchises, groupe d’îlots parmi
lesquels notre navire glissa sans encombre. Trois jours encore et nous
devions toucher la terre; nous nous félicitions déjà d’être au terme de
notre voyage, lorsqu’un ouragan des plus effroyables vint fondre sur
nous. Le tonnerre gronda dans l’immensité avec accompagnement d’éclairs;
des nuages noirs, énormes, roulaient dans le ciel avec furie, ils
étaient en couches si épaisses au-dessus de nos têtes, qu’ils
assombrissaient l’atmosphère dans toute son étendue. Au loin, partout se
montraient à nos yeux des trombes à l’aspect gigantesque; si nous
étions touchés par l’une d’elles nous coulions infailliblement: le
capitaine, vieux loup de mer, jetait souvent les yeux sur son baromètre,
et chaque fois il n’avait rien de rassurant; nous subissions, disait-il,
la queue d’un typhon. L’inquiétude la plus vive commençait à s’emparer
de tous; _l’Arturo_ vint à faire eau; il fallut forcer les Chinois de
l’entrepont à s’employer aux pompes. Il y avait trois jours que nous
étions submergés, c’est le mot, par une pluie antédiluvienne lorsque la
tempête vint pourtant à s’apaiser. Mais un calme plat, qui dura neuf
jours, succéda à la tourmente. De temps à autre, une brise légère
s’élevait, mais des courants contraires nous repoussaient toujours.
Bref, il y avait vingt et un jours que nous étions ballottés aux abords
de l’empire chinois, lorsque le capitaine vint nous dire que nos vivres
étaient presque épuisés. Les matelots de _l’Arturo_, harassés de
fatigues et peu confiants du reste dans l’expérience de leur capitaine,
lui déclarèrent qu’ils se refuseraient à exécuter les manœuvres s’il ne
leur permettait de détacher une embarcation et d’aller avec une partie
de l’équipage à la recherche de Hong-Kong, qui ne devait pas être
éloigné de plus de trente milles. Le capitaine avait vingt-deux hommes
d’équipage; il consentit à en laisser partir huit. Il fit ensuite jeter
l’ancre près d’une côte vers laquelle nous avions pu avancer, et nous
attendîmes le retour de ces courageux matelots qui se dévouaient
d’eux-mêmes au salut de tous. Vingt-quatre heures après, ils revinrent
avec un steamer qui nous prit à la remorque. C’est ainsi que nous fîmes
notre entrée dans la rade de Hong-Kong, le 29 août, après soixante-seize
jours de traversée.

       *       *       *       *       *

Le lendemain de mon arrivée, je fus mandée au consulat de France, ainsi
que les autres passagers qui composaient notre navire, afin de constater
la mort de ma malheureuse amie. Je fis au vice-consul, M. Haskell, un
récit fidèle de la position dans laquelle je me trouvais; il fut rempli
de bienveillance pour moi et me conseilla de ne pas continuer une
entreprise aussi malheureusement commencée. Je lui répondis que mon seul
désir était de retourner en Californie. «Laissez-moi arrêter moi-même
votre passage, me dit le vice-consul; les recommandations que je
donnerai à votre égard vous protégeront, je l’espère, jusqu’à votre
arrivée.» Je le remerciai de tant de bonté et j’envisageai avec un peu
moins d’inquiétude la durée que devait avoir mon séjour en Chine.

L’île de Hong-Kong ou Victoria Hong-Kong, comme l’appellent les Anglais,
leur fut cédée par les Chinois en 1842. Elle compte vingt mille âmes
d’indigènes et un millier d’Européens au plus. Située au bas d’une aride
montagne, la vue n’en est pas des plus agréables; et pourtant lorsqu’on
entre dans la rue principale, on est surpris d’y rencontrer de jolies
constructions semblables à celles d’Europe; la plupart sont bâties en
pierres de taille avec de larges galeries à colonnes, _verandahs_, les
ferment presque toutes avec des jalousies pour préserver de la chaleur
tropicale. Sur une des hauteurs, à gauche du port, on découvre la maison
de ville où siégent les autorités; un peu plus loin un vaste corps de
bâtiment qui sert de caserne aux soldats de terre, sujets anglais, et la
place d’Armes, espèce de fortification où plusieurs pièces de canon,
braquées sur la rue principale, tiennent en respect la population
chinoise. Puis une église du culte protestant.

Le climat à Hong-Kong est malsain et fiévreux, les chaleurs y sont
lourdes et pesantes, et le meilleur signe de santé est d’être dans une
transpiration continuelle et d’avoir des petites taches rougeâtres
semblables à celles de la petite vérole.

La vie pour les Européens est la plus monotone qu’on puisse imaginer;
aucun genre de plaisir, aucun lieu public, rien que la vie intérieure.
Car, chevaux, bals, spectacles, réunions, il n’y en a pas. Le seul
agrément que l’on puisse se procurer est d’avoir un bateau pour aller se
promener en rade; une femme ne sort jamais à pied, par ton d’abord; et
par principe, les Chinoises elles-mêmes se montrent fort peu dans les
rues; je ne parle pas de la basse classe qui fait exception. La moindre
sortie, le plus petit trajet s’opère en chaise à porteur.

On rencontre dans cette ville tous les métiers: les tailleurs, les
cordonniers, les blanchisseurs s’y font concurrence pour fournir aux
Européens; les femmes chinoises, en général, ne sont pas soumises au
travail; car on n’en voit aucune dans les maisons de commerce. Les
marchands ambulants sont en grand nombre; et si ce n’est le costume et
le langage qui diffèrent, on peut les comparer à nos marchands des
quatre saisons; ils vendent des fruits, des rafraîchissements, des
gâteaux, des poissons grillés, de la volaille rôtie, etc. Beaucoup de
mendiants, d’estropiés, d’aveugles parcourent les rues. Ces derniers
agitent constamment une petite clochette pour attirer l’attention
publique. Puis aussi, _ce qui ne manque pas de poésie_, des ménestrels;
ces bardes des temps anciens, sur un signe, entrent à domicile, et, pour
quelque menue monnaie récitent ou chantent de vieilles légendes, tantôt
tristes et tantôt bouffonnes.

Les barbiers ou coiffeurs, faisant vingt fois par jour le tour de la
ville avec tout leur attirail sur le dos, ne sont pas les moins curieux;
ils se promènent devant les maisons comme les porteurs d’eau dans nos
rues; un boutiquier ou un passant a-t-il besoin de se faire raser,
épiler ou teindre les sourcils? il fait signe à l’artiste en question,
et l’opération a lieu sur le pas de sa porte ou sur un trottoir le long
d’un mur.

Hong-Kong n’a que deux hôtels; la vie y est aussi chère qu’en
Californie, et le séjour on ne peut plus désagréable; ainsi les maisons
les plus propres, les mieux tenues, où l’on emploie de nombreux
_coolies_ (nom que l’on donne aux domestiques chinois), sont infestées
d’affreux insectes qui vous entourent obstinément et prennent à tâche de
vous tourmenter; ce sont: l’araignée, le cancrolat et le moustique; on
rencontre l’araignée et le cancrolat partout, sur les meubles, dans les
tiroirs, dans les chaussures, le long des rideaux, dans les malles; si
l’on décroche un vêtement du portemanteau, on est sûr, en le secouant,
de voir tomber une de ces horribles bêtes qui, une fois à terre, se met
à courir et se fourre dans un autre coin bien avant que l’on ne songe à
l’attraper. Mais le plus agaçant de ces deux insectes est le cancrolat,
parce qu’il vole, et surtout le soir, aux lumières. Au moment où l’on
s’y attend le moins, l’un vous tombe sur la tête, un autre vient
s’arrêter sur votre nez. Le matin, en vous réveillant, vous les trouvez
jusqu’à deux et trois noyés dans un verre d’eau. Un jour, à table, on
m’en servit un entouré de légumes; c’est vraiment répugnant; mais il est
tout à fait impossible d’empêcher cela.

Le parfum des fleurs, en Chine, semble plus suave, plus pénétrant que
celui d’Europe. Je fus admise à visiter la demeure d’un mandarin, et je
fus aussi étonnée que ravie en la parcourant. Là, tout était factice,
grottes, monticules, rochers, ruisseaux, aucune allée ne suivait la
ligne droite, et puis des ponts, des kiosques, des temples, des pagodes.
Ce qui me parut de la plus grande originalité, ce fut des arbres taillés
de manière à représenter des figures de tous genres. L’un, c’était un
poisson; l’autre, un oiseau; celui-ci, un chat; celui-là, un bœuf, et
bien d’autres bêtes encore; chacun de ces arbres était peint et coloré,
afin qu’il rendît bien exactement la physionomie qu’on avait voulu lui
prêter. A côté de cela, toute espèce de fleurs et d’arbres fruitiers
rabougris: on sait que les Chinois ont un goût tout lilliputien pour
contrarier la croissance des végétaux.

Cette campagne en miniature, ces aspects contournés à chaque pas me
plurent par leur étrangeté même; c’était pour moi d’une nouveauté
délicieuse; l’eau baignait de vertes pelouses coupées de distance en
distance; elle entretenait la fraîcheur du sol; les bocages étaient
pleins d’oiseaux et de fleurs; c’est dans ces jardins enchanteurs que
les Chinoises concentrent leurs plaisirs, vivant par le devoir et par
la loi séparées du monde plus encore que les femmes de l’Orient.

Je profitai du temps qui me restait encore pour aller, avec mes
compagnons de voyage, visiter Canton. Nous étions adressés, recommandés
à un négociant de cette cité superbe, car il n’y existe pas d’hôtel.

Un bateau à vapeur faisant le trajet le long de la côte nous y conduisit
en quelques heures.

Rien ne peut surprendre davantage l’œil d’un Européen que l’aspect de
cette ville bizarre: à son approche, on découvre se balançant sur les
eaux une multitude de jonques de la plus grande variété, où fourmille
une population sans nombre. Ces bâtiments aux formes les plus étranges,
ces maisons flottantes, de toutes dimensions, toutes grandeurs, servent
à abriter ce reflux d’êtres humains vivant, grouillant là, comme s’ils
avaient trouvé la solution du mouvement perpétuel.

Nous mîmes pied à terre dans cette ville immense, où nul peuple au monde
ne peut rivaliser pour l’activité industrielle.

Nous nous dirigeâmes vers les factoreries; ce ne fut pas sans peine que
nous y parvînmes. Nous n’avions pas fait cent pas dans les rues, que
tout le monde nous suivait des yeux en nous montrant du doigt, en criant
après nous, pour être plus véridique. Mais comme notre société s’était
renforcée d’autres personnes, nous fîmes peu d’attention à ces
criailleries tartaro-chinoises. Je remarquai sur notre passage que
presque chaque maison avait un petit autel dans une niche, consacré à
l’usage religieux. Ce qui me frappa surtout, ce fut l’ordre parfait avec
lequel sont rangés les magasins.

A Canton, chaque profession est classée par corps de métier. Une rue
n’est habitée que par les marchands de porcelaine, une autre par les
vendeurs de thé, une troisième par les négociants en soieries, etc. On
ne peut se lasser d’admirer les étalages merveilleusement disposés, où
figurent des produits d’un travail admirable: meubles de laque,
éventails d’ivoire, écrans, stores, tapisseries, étoffes à reflets
éclatants, se disputent à chaque pas l’attention de l’étranger. La rue
appelée _New-China street_ est bordée de ces magasins splendides,
installés dans des bâtiments aux toits aplatis, garnis de boules
multicolores. Chacun a son enseigne perpendiculaire, où des lettres
d’or sur un fond écarlate apprennent le nom du négociant et sa
spécialité.

Sur la chaussée circule une foule compacte, bruyante, affairée. Ce sont
des marchands ambulants avec leurs cris gutturaux et bizarres, des
bourgeois graves et solennels, avec leur tunique flottante et leur
inévitable parasol. Quelques femmes de la dernière classe du peuple
apparaissent seules à longs intervalles parmi tous ces hommes.

Après une heure de marche, nous parvînmes à la demeure de M. Liwingston,
lequel nous reçut de la manière la plus gracieuse, nous prévenant
toutefois de ne pas trop prolonger notre séjour à Canton. Il régnait en
ce moment des troubles d’insurrections dans l’intérieur aussi bien que
sur les côtes, et la prudence voulait que chacun se tînt sur la
défensive. Les citoyens anglais n’ignoraient pas que le peuple chinois
tramait sourdement contre eux des plans de révolte, et leurs prévisions
étaient bien fondées, car, à la connaissance de l’Europe entière, ils ne
tardèrent pas à éclater. Les actes de piraterie, en outre, pullulaient.
Tout cela n’avait rien de rassurant. Ces motifs hâtèrent, comme on peut
le comprendre, notre retour à Hong-Kong.

Avant, j’eus pourtant l’occasion de visiter la demeure d’un mandarin,
laquelle présentait un luxe merveilleux, du moins au point de vue
chinois. Les habitants en relation avec les Européens ne refusent pas
d’accorder cette satisfaction.

Qu’y avait-il, en réalité? Je ne saurais trop le dire.

C’était un corps de bâtiment entouré de terrasses, autour desquelles
grimpaient les fleurs les plus odoriférantes. A l’intérieur, les
appartements étaient séparés par des cloisons en bambous légères et
vernis. Des nattes en paille de riz et de diverses couleurs encadraient
les planchers. De tout côté, çà et là, des canapés, des fauteuils, des
chaises, la plupart en bambous, quelques-uns en bois sculpté. Sur les
meubles, des fleurs, des instruments de musique, des pipes pour fumer
l’opium; au plafond pendaient des lustres, des lanternes de toutes
formes, de toutes couleurs, en verre, gaze ou papier, ornées de franges,
de houppes, de colifichets. Sur les murs, des tableaux révélant
l’enfance de l’art, et des peintures vernies d’où se détachaient en
caractères métalliques des inscriptions et des sentences de philosophie.
Ce que j’eusse été curieuse de voir, c’était l’appartement des femmes,
mais il était sévèrement interdit aux étrangers.

Pendant les trois jours où je demeurai à Canton, je fus spectatrice
d’une attaque entre les rebelles et les soldats de l’empereur. Une armée
chinoise est la chose la plus grotesque qu’on puisse imaginer; il n’est
guère possible de donner une idée de ces soldats dont les noms répondent
aux formidables appellations de tigres de guerre et de fendeurs de
montagnes. Étant montée sur la terrasse d’une maison, je pus voir à une
distance facile un corps de ces troupes avec son général en chef. Tous
ces guerriers, ces braves, marchaient dans le plus grand désordre et
comme une bande de brigands; ils étaient armés de lances, de mauvais
fusils, et presque chaque soldat avait un parapluie, un éventail et une
lanterne, ce qui me rappela les scènes burlesques que j’avais vues dans
leurs théâtres à San-Francisco.

Le bruit du canon, les rumeurs lointaines et braillardes des Chinois,
ces attaques successives que l’on voyait au loin, les fausses alertes
qui venaient distraire ou inquiéter à chaque instant, nous déterminèrent
enfin à repartir.

Il y avait un mois que j’étais en Chine lorsque le vice-consul me fit
savoir qu’un navire allait mettre à la voile pour la Californie. Il eut
l’extrême bonté de faire venir le capitaine, auquel il me recommanda
particulièrement. Cet officier, nommé Rooney, lui engagea sa parole et
lui promit d’avoir pour moi tous les égards possibles. Je remerciai M.
Haskell de tout l’intérêt qu’il m’avait témoigné et j’allai, le cœur
presque content, faire mes préparatifs de départ[A].

[A] M. Georges Haskell, remplissant les fonctions de vice-consul à
Hong-Kong, était Américain; il fut si noble et si digne plus tard, que
je considère comme un devoir de dévoiler son origine.




CHAPITRE V

     Le capitaine Rooney.--Than-Sing.--Le typhon.--Chute du mât de
     misaine.--Effets de la tempête.--Désastres du _Caldera_.--Les
     pirates chinois.--Scènes dans l’entre-ponts.--Équipage
     enchaîné.--Interrogatoire.--Menaces de mort.--Pillage.


Le 4 octobre 1854, je me rendis, sur les quatre heures de l’après midi,
à bord du navire _le Caldera_, qui était sous pavillon chilien, et qui,
le soir même, devait mettre à la voile pour la Californie. Je me
trouvais donc encore une fois à la veille d’un long et pénible voyage;
cette solitude à laquelle j’allais être livrée désormais, ces dangers
que l’on court sur mer plus encore que sur terre, venaient, à ce moment
décisif, se présenter à mon esprit. Aussi, j’étais soucieuse. Le
capitaine, voyant mon affliction morale vint causer avec moi, et me
donner quelque encouragement. M. Rooney avait, si l’on peut dire, une
expression heureuse, c’était un homme d’environ trente-cinq ans, de
taille moyenne, brun; il avait un barbe fine et épaisse qui lui
encadrait le visage, lequel était un peu court, mais ses yeux étaient
grands et bleus, et cet ensemble des plus caractéristique donnait à sa
physionomie un reflet de jovialité et surtout d’énergie. Enfin c’était
un vrai type de marin, chez lequel le courage et la bonté se lisaient à
première vue.

Mon premier soin fut de visiter ma cabine et d’y installer mes bagages.

Peu de temps après le navire levait l’ancre.

Je fus prise alors d’une vague tristesse que je comprenais d’autant
moins, que ce retour en Amérique me rapprochait de ma patrie. Pour
m’arracher à cette funeste disposition, je me mis à examiner le navire.
C’était un beau trois-mâts de huit cents tonneaux, bien gréé, et d’une
forme gracieuse. A l’arrière, formant l’extrême partie du navire, était
la dunette, sur le pont de laquelle on montait par un escalier. Je
visitai l’intérieur de cette dunette qui servait de salle à manger; de
chaque côté étaient disposées les cabines. Au fond, se trouvaient deux
chambres qui avaient des croisées. L’une était le salon du capitaine,
l’autre appartenait au subrécargue d’une maison de commerce de
San-Francisco, lequel avait une forte cargaison à bord. Toutes les
boiseries étaient peintes en blanc avec des filets d’or. Cet intérieur
était éclairé au milieu par une fenêtre à tambour. Cette disposition
générale inspirait la sécurité par l’ordre parfait avec lequel chaque
chose était à sa place; il semblait que nous n’avions plus qu’à nous
laisser aller à un paisible sommeil pendant les trois mois que devait
durer notre traversée.

Il y avait à bord un passager dont j’aurai souvent à parler; c’était un
Chinois d’une cinquantaine d’années. Il avait aussi une maison de
commerce à San-Francisco, et il emportait une forte cargaison d’opium,
de sucre et de café. Than-Sing, tel était son nom, avait le type commun
aux gens de sa nation, de plus il était excessivement marqué par la
petite vérole. Cependant sa laideur n’avait rien de repoussant, il avait
toujours le sourire sur les lèvres.

Notre premier dîner à bord pouvait être l’objet d’une singularité; nous
étions quatre personnes de nation différente; le capitaine était
Anglais, le subrécargue, comme je l’appellerai dorénavant, était
Américain, Than-Sing, Chinois, et moi Française. Je rappelle avec
intention cette particularité pour donner une idée des difficultés que
devait nous apporter en un péril commun cette différence de langage.
Than-Sing parlait l’anglais comme moi-même, c’est-à-dire un peu, mais
aucun ne parlait français; on verra plus tard comment Than-Sing, qui
seul parlait chinois, devait nous rendre d’inappréciables services.

Notre équipage se composait de dix-sept hommes de différentes nations.

Le lendemain matin de notre départ, je fus réveillée désagréablement;
une grande agitation régnait à bord, des pas précipités retentissaient
sur le pont. L’inquiétude me fit lever, je m’habillai à la hâte, et je
sortis pour voir ce qui se passait. Le navire était en panne, un matelot
venait de tomber à la mer; on apercevait sa tête au milieu des vagues à
une distance très-éloignée déjà. Le malheureux nagea vingt minutes au
moins avant qu’on pût, à l’aide de cordes, le hisser sur le pont. Ses
camarades lui donnèrent de vives marques d’intérêt, mais il répondit
avec brusquerie et comme un homme qui a honte de sa mésaventure.

Quoique cet incident n’eût occasionné aucun mal réel, il me fit une
impression fâcheuse. Je trouvai que, pour le second jour de notre
voyage, c’était mal débuter, et puis le chant de ces matelots anglais
contribua aussi à augmenter ma tristesse. Ils accompagnaient les
manœuvres par une mélodie bizarre et monotone qui ne ressemblait en rien
aux airs pleins de gaîté de nos marins français. Je rentrai toute
soucieuse, et, pour me distraire, je m’occupai à mettre toutes choses en
ordre; je donnai à boire et à manger à deux charmants petits oiseaux que
j’avais emportés de Hong-Kong dans une cage, je les couvris de caresses;
je n’avais plus qu’eux à aimer.

La brise était molle, et pendant cette journée nous avançâmes lentement.
Pourtant, vers le soir, le vent s’éleva, il vint à souffler de tous les
points de l’horizon; je ne pensais pas sans inquiétude à l’affreuse
tempête que j’avais déjà essuyée sur _l’Arturo_, lors de mon arrivée en
Chine. J’allai vers le capitaine Rooney, et je le questionnai;
comprenant mes appréhensions, il essaya de me rassurer, mais je voyais,
malgré lui, son visage se rembrunir, et c’était avec juste raison. Le
baromètre qui s’était maintenu jusque-là, tomba si bas en moins d’une
heure, que le doute n’était plus permis; nous allions être aux prises
avec le typhon. Le typhon, ce vent si redoutable dans les mers de l’Inde
et de la Chine, et dont l’influence désastreuse amène toujours, sur mer
comme sur terre, la désolation et la mort. Le typhon est plutôt la
réunion de tous les vents soufflant avec fureur des quatre points
cardinaux, qu’un seul soufflant sans partage. Ce n’est pas plutôt le
vent du nord que celui du sud, le vent d’ouest que celui d’est; ce sont
tous les vents combattant entre eux et faisant de la mer le théâtre de
leur lutte. Le capitaine, reconnaissant à ces signes précurseurs que
nous étions menacés de l’une des plus terribles tempêtes, fit exécuter
de rapides manœuvres. Il était temps, car les vents cette fois étaient
déchaînés, la mer tourmentée en tous sens soulevait ses vagues comme des
furies; de sombres éclairs sillonnaient la nue précédant les coups du
tonnerre dont le bruit éclatait de toutes parts avec fracas. Poussé de
l’avant à l’arrière et retourné brusquement sur lui-même sans que son
gouvernail pût lui imprimer de direction, _le Caldéra_ menaçait à chaque
instant de s’engloutir; il y avait à peine deux heures que la tempête
s’était déclarée, que déjà c’était un vrai désastre: le mât d’artimon et
le grand mât étaient plus d’à moitié brisés, deux canots secoués dans
leurs liens avaient été emportés à la mer. Tout se brisait â
l’intérieur; la mer entrait à profusion par les sabords; chaque vague
qui s’engouffrait dans la dunette produisait le bruit d’une écluse; les
bois craquaient de tous côtés.

Le capitaine se présentait de temps en temps à la porte de ma cabine
pour dissiper mes inquiétudes. Ses cheveux étaient collés sur son
visage, ses vêtements ruisselants d’eau. «Vous avez peur, me disait-il
avec une brusquerie bienveillante.--Non, répondais-je en essayant de
dissimuler ma frayeur.» Mais la pâleur de mon visage trahissait mes
craintes, car il hochait la tête avec un air de doute, tout en allant
surveiller les manœuvres.

Je dois avouer que j’étais dans des transes mortelles. Tout dans ma
cabine était renversé, jeté pêle-mêle. Mes pauvres petits oiseaux, que
j’avais avec grand’peine, au risque de me blesser, rattachés à la
cloison, se blottissaient dans le coin de leur cage avec des marques
d’épouvante; j’étais moi-même couchée, le roulis ne permettant plus de
se tenir debout. La mer déferlait avec une telle violence contre les
flancs du navire, que ma terreur augmentait à chaque instant. Tout à
coup, un fracas épouvantable retentit sur ma tête, et je me trouvai, par
une forte secousse, lancée hors de mon lit sur le plancher. Au comble de
l’effroi, j’y restai à deux genoux, je me cachai la tête dans les mains:
il me semblait que le navire allait s’entr’ouvrir et que nous allions
être précipités dans les abîmes. Ce bruit affreux provenait de la chute
du mât de misaine, entraînant avec lui les haubans; le vent l’avait
brisé au pied en tombant; il avait blessé un matelot qu’on avait relevé
dans un état déplorable. Comment _le Caldera_ résistait-il encore? Après
quatorze heures passées dans les plus cruelles angoisses, la tempête
vint pourtant à se calmer, le vent se ramollit, la mer conservait encore
bien du roulis, mais cet apaisement sensible de ses fureurs nous
semblait être la plus complète tranquillité.

J’entre-bâillai la porte de ma cabine et je jetai un coup d’œil dans la
salle à manger. On n’y voyait plus alors qu’un amas confus de meubles et
de vaisselle renversés et brisés; l’eau y ruisselait de toutes parts.

Vers quatre heures, voulant contempler les effets désastreux de la
tempête, je montai sur le pont; je m’y frayai un chemin avec peine; il
était rempli d’objets brisés, câbles, chaînes, sans compter les trois
mâts. L’eau de la mer avait été tellement remuée dans ses profondeurs,
qu’elle avait pris la teinte jaunâtre de ses couches de sable. Le ciel
chargé de nuages éclairait l’horizon par un jour douteux; je portai avec
tristesse mes yeux autour de moi, et je vis nos matelots allant çà et
là, l’air épuisé, accablés de fatigue. Cinquante-deux poules et six
porcs avaient été tués par l’effet du roulis. Comme nous avions la terre
en vue, le capitaine, après avoir fait hisser avec grand’peine une voile
à l’avant, fit mettre le cap sur Hong-Kong. Il nous fallait regagner
cette ville, notre navire ayant besoin d’au moins six semaines de
réparations.

En même temps que le calme se rétablissait l’appétit, oublié pendant le
danger, reprenait ses droits. L’heure du dîner venue, chacun prit place
à la table, et peu de paroles s’échangèrent pendant ce repas. Nous
étions tous recueillis comme des gens qui viennent d’échapper à la mort.
J’examinai la figure du capitaine, elle était empreinte d’un profond
découragement. J’ai su depuis qu’il songeait à une lugubre aventure qui
lui était arrivée deux ans auparavant. Pris par des pirates indiens,
après un combat où tout son équipage avait trouvé la mort, le capitaine
Rooney avait été attaché au mât de son navire, et ces barbares ennemis
lui avaient tailladé le corps en tous sens, sans pouvoir obtenir de lui
autre chose qu’un sourire de mépris. Ils le gardèrent prisonnier six
mois, après lesquels il parvint à s’échapper.

Le subrécargue présentant la mine la plus piteuse que l’on puisse voir;
car, outre la crainte qu’il avait eue de perdre la vie, il finit par
avouer qu’au moment du danger, ses plus cruelles angoisses avaient été
pour la perte de ses marchandises.

Than-Sing, le Chinois, avait la physionomie d’un homme qui se sent
franchement heureux d’être sauvé; aussi son sourire bienveillant
faisait-il contraste avec le malaise général.

Quant à moi, encore sous le coup de mes récentes terreurs, je songeais
combien la fatalité semblait vouloir déjouer tous mes projets d’avenir.
Que puis-je connaître de plus des horreurs de la mer, me disais-je, si
ce n’est d’y trouver une tombe?

Vers huit heures, le capitaine ordonna que tout le monde prît du repos.
J’éprouvais une telle fatigue, que j’aurais dormi sur des planches aussi
bien que sur un lit de plumes. Je dis sur des planches parce qu’au
moment de me coucher je m’aperçus que mon matelas, mes draps, toute ma
literie enfin étaient trempés d’eau. M. Rooney mit une complaisance
extrême à faire chercher une partie de ce qui m’était nécessaire. Mais
ma lassitude ne me permettait pas d’attendre longtemps, la première
couverture que l’on me présenta, je m’en enveloppai et m’étendant sur
mon lit dégarni, je ne tardai pas à tomber dans un sommeil profond.

       *       *       *       *       *

Il pouvait être minuit lorsqu’un songe effrayant vint agiter mon
esprit. Il me semblait entendre des cris infernaux, poussés par une
bande de démons. Était-ce une hallucination? ou cet horrible cauchemar
avait-il de la réalité? J’étais oppressée, souffrante, et plus d’une
fois je me retournai sur ma couche; le songe durait toujours, il fut
tout à coup rompu par un effroyable vacarme. Éveillée en sursaut, je me
dressai sur mon séant, et j’ouvris les yeux, j’étais éblouie, ma cabine
se trouvait entièrement illuminée par une lueur rouge. Frappée de
terreur et persuadée que le navire devenait la proie d’un incendie, je
sautai en bas de mon lit et me précipitai vers la porte. Le capitaine et
le subrécargue étaient sur le seuil de leurs cabines. Je jetai des yeux
hagards sur eux, ils me regardaient sans pouvoir proférer une parole,
car nous entendions des hurlements sauvages et comme des coups de massue
qui retentissaient contre les flancs du navire. Des pierres, des
projectiles de toutes sortes étaient lancés dans les carreaux des
fenêtres du plafond, de la dunette, et les brisaient en mille pièces,
des flammes semblaient brûler, tout au-dessus de nous; nous restions
terrifiés.

J’allai vers le capitaine et je me cramponnai à son bras. Je voulais
parler, je n’avais pas de voix, quelque chose d’aride dans mon gosier
arrêtait les paroles sur mes lèvres; je parvins cependant à lui dire
avec des sons étranglés: «Capitaine! capitaine! le feu! le feu est au
navire!..... Répondez-moi..... Entendez-vous là-haut?...» Mais il était
entièrement pétrifié, car il me répondit: «_I don’t know_ (je ne sais
pas).» Il s’éloigna tout à coup et reparut avec un revolver à la main,
la seule arme qu’il y eût à bord. En ce moment, le second de l’équipage
accourut de l’avant du navire, et, s’approchant du capitaine, lui dit
quelques mots que je n’entendis pas. Plus prompte que la pensée, et
soupçonnant un terrible malheur, je rentrai précipitamment dans ma
cabine et je regardai derrière le carreau qui s’ouvrait sur la mer. Au
feu extérieur, j’entrevis les mâtures de plusieurs jonques chinoises. Je
ressortis épouvantée, folle, en criant: «Les pirates!..... les
pirates!.....» En effet, c’étaient les pirates, ces écumeurs de mer de
la Chine, si redoutés par leurs cruautés. Ils nous tenaient en leur
pouvoir; trois jonques, montées chacune par trente ou quarante hommes,
entouraient _le Caldera_. Ces brigands semblaient être des démons
sortis du sein de la tempête pour achever son œuvre de destruction. Le
délabrement de notre navire désemparé était pour eux un facile succès.
Après avoir jeté sur le _Caldera_ des crocs en fer, fixés à de longues
amarres, ils n’avaient pas tardé à grimper le long du bordage avec
l’agilité des chats. Une fois parvenus sur le pont, ils s’étaient livrés
à une danse infernale en poussant des cris qui n’ont rien d’humain. Les
projectiles, en outre, cassant les vitres, nous avaient tirés du profond
sommeil où nous étions tous plongés. Les lueurs que nous avions prises
pour le reflet d’un incendie, étaient produites par des matières
inflammables. Ils emploient ce moyen afin de frapper de stupeur et
d’effroi ceux qu’ils attaquent, et paralysent souvent par là leur
résistance.

Le capitaine, le subrécargue, le second, firent quelques pas en avant
pour sortir de la dunette et aller sur le pont; je les suivis
instinctivement. A peine avions-nous fait trois pas, que des boules
fulminantes furent jetées sur nous et nous forcèrent à opérer une
retraite. Il s’en fallut de bien peu que nous ne fussions atteints par
cette pluie de feu qui nous aurait causé d’atroces brûlures. Nous ne
pouvions nous expliquer où ils voulaient en venir, leur intention était
évidemment de mettre le navire au pillage. Le capitaine, qui n’avait que
son revolver pour nous défendre, jugea qu’il était prudent de nous
dérober le plus longtemps possible à leur fureur. C’était une précaution
bien inutile, car ils devaient nous trouver n’importe où, aussi bien que
si nous fussions restés dans nos lits; mais notre esprit troublé ne nous
laissait pas le loisir de raisonner. Nous descendîmes avec précipitation
dans l’entreponts, dont l’ouverture se trouvait justement sous nos
pieds, et nous nous cachâmes le mieux que nous pûmes. Cinq matelots se
trouvaient déjà en cet endroit; nous ne savions ce qu’était devenu le
reste de l’équipage; peut-être était-il déjà fait prisonnier.

Quant à Than-Sing, il n’avait pas reparu depuis la veille au soir.

Les pirates continuaient à pousser leurs cris sauvages. Par un
écartement dans le panneau qui nous recouvrait, on pouvait voir, à
travers les lueurs incendiaires, quelques-unes de leurs têtes hideuses
entourées d’étoffes rouges en forme de turban. Leur costume était comme
celui de tous les Chinois, excepté que leur ceinture était garnie de
pistolets, de larges couteaux, et chacun d’eux avait un sabre nu à la
main. A cette vue, un nuage de sang me passa devant les yeux, mes jambes
fléchirent sous moi; je croyais ma dernière heure arrivée. Rampant des
pieds et des mains, je m’acheminai vers le capitaine, en cet instant de
détresse son appui me semblait cher. Nous nous tînmes blottis au milieu
des ballots de marchandises, à peu près à vingt pieds de l’ouverture. Il
nous était impossible d’aller plus loin, le navire étant comble dans
cette partie. Nous respirions à peine, quand nous entendîmes une foule
de pirates entrer dans nos cabines et bouleverser tout avec violence.
Une voix connue parvint en même temps jusqu’à nous: c’était celle de
Than-Sing. Une vive altercation paraissait s’élever entre lui et les
pirates. On le sommait sans doute de dire où nous étions, car nous
l’entendîmes crier en anglais: «Capitaine, capitaine! où êtes-vous? en
bas? Répondez! venez! venez!...»

Mais personne ne bougeait.

Le capitaine Rooney retournait convulsivement son pistolet dans ses
mains, en murmurant qu’il allait briser la première tête de pirate qui
apparaîtrait. Je le suppliai de n’en rien faire; une pareille tentative
non-seulement devait être de nul effet, mais encore pouvait servir à
nous faire égorger tous. Il sentit si bien cela du reste qu’il mit son
arme au repos en la cachant sous ses vêtements.

Nous n’attendîmes pas longtemps la venue de nos ennemis; c’en était
fait, nous allions être découverts... Je frissonne encore à ce souvenir!
Ils levèrent la trappe et firent descendre après une corde, une lanterne
allumée. Nous nous pressions les uns contre les autres pour nous dérober
à ce jet de lumière qui nous gagnait peu à peu et devait révéler notre
présence. C’était peine perdue; des jambes passèrent bientôt, puis des
corps tout entiers, et nous nous trouvâmes couchés en joue par une
douzaine de pirates qui cherchaient avec des yeux de tigres dans la
direction qui leur faisait face; ils étaient armés jusqu’aux dents. Le
capitaine le premier se détacha de notre groupe, et s’avança à leur
rencontre. Il leur présenta son revolver du côté de la crosse. Les
pirates levèrent tous à la fois les bras d’un air menaçant; mais voyant
qu’on ne leur opposait aucune résistance, ils se mirent à nous
considérer avec une joie sauvage. Deux de ces bandits s’élancèrent hors
de l’entrepont et firent signe avec des gestes brusques qu’il fallait
les suivre. Plus morte que vive, j’étais restée blottie derrière un
ballot; je vis du coin de l’œil mes compagnons remonter un à un, je
voulais m’avancer comme eux, mais j’étais foudroyée d’épouvante. Quand
le dernier eut disparu, que je me vis sur le point d’être seule avec ces
monstres, ces assassins, une frayeur plus forte que le courage s’empara
de moi, je me raidis par un effort suprême, et je m’avançai à mon tour.
Alors à ma robe, à ma coiffure, ils reconnurent que j’étais une femme;
une exclamation de surprise éclata parmi eux, une joie horrible se
peignit sur leur physionomie; j’envisageai le lieu où j’étais comme une
tombe béante: il me semblait déjà sentir les griffes de ces démons. A ce
moment ce n’était plus du courage, de l’énergie, c’était du délire. Je
m’élançai vers l’ouverture, et j’élevai les bras en l’air, en
recommandant mon âme à Dieu. Au même instant, je me sentis saisir et
entraîner, j’étais hors de l’entreponts.

Arrivée là, je fus entourée d’une foule de pirates qui se tenaient en
cercle avec des sabres et des pistolets au poing. Je jetai un coup d’œil
égaré sur mes agresseurs: ils fixaient sur moi des yeux avides en
m’examinant. Ce n’était pas, comme on pourrait le croire, l’insuffisance
de ma mise qui excitait leur curiosité, car, dès le moment de leur
arrivée, par une sorte d’instinct bien naturel chez une femme, je
m’étais revêtue à la hâte d’une robe, et j’avais mis mes pieds dans des
chaussures. Ce qui excitait leur cupidité, c’était quelques bijoux que
j’avais conservés; comprenant leurs exclamations bruyantes, je détachai
bien vite mes boucles d’oreilles, mes bagues, et je les leur jetai pour
m’éviter toute brutalité au cas où ils n’auraient pu résister longtemps
à l’impatience de les posséder. Ceux qui étaient le plus rapprochés de
moi se ruèrent dessus avec avidité, au grand mécontentement des autres;
ces derniers même paraissaient si exaspérés, qu’ils cherchèrent querelle
aux premiers, et il s’en serait suivi probablement une lutte sanglante,
si la voix du chef ne fût intervenue avec autorité; tout cela s’était
passé en quelques moments. On me poussa ensuite sur le pont, je montai
l’escalier qui conduisait sur la dunette; là, je retrouvai mes
compagnons de captivité déjà enchaînés, et je m’assis auprès d’eux comme
on me l’indiquait.

La mer était encore houleuse; de gros nuages noirs, dernières menaces de
la tempête, couraient çà et là dans le ciel et allaient se confondre
dans l’horizon ténébreux; il s’élevait du sein des flots une brume
épaisse qui nous enveloppait du froid le plus glacial; le pauvre
_Caldera_, ainsi désemparé, capturé, ressemblait à un ponton en révolte.
Il régnait parmi nous un silence de mort, qu’interrompaient parfois les
gémissements du matelot qui avait été atteint par la chute du mât de
misaine. Ces poignantes émotions avaient tellement troublé mon esprit,
que mille idées confuses se pressaient dans ma tête; j’éprouvais l’envie
de pleurer, et mes yeux restaient secs. Je promenais sur chacun des
captifs des regards désolés. Cette communauté de malheurs m’attachait à
eux; je redoutais qu’on ne vînt à m’en séparer.

Pendant ce temps-là, les pirates, qui pouvaient être au nombre de cent,
couraient en tous sens dans le navire, se livrant au pillage.
Quelques-uns s’approchèrent de moi et me montrèrent mes compagnons
attachés. Pensant qu’ils voulaient me lier aussi, je leur tendis les
mains, mais ils me firent un signe négatif. L’un d’eux impatienté, me
passa la lame froide de son sabre le long du cou, faisant le simulacre
de me couper la tête; je ne bougeai pas; mon visage exprimait sans doute
un morne désespoir, mais je n’avais pas une larme. Cette immense douleur
me mettait à une si rude épreuve, qu’elle semblait déjà avoir tout
anéanti, tout épuisé en moi. Voulant néanmoins les satisfaire, je leur
tendis encore les mains afin qu’ils pussent me les lier, si telle était
leur intention. Ils s’en emparèrent avec colère, puis ils recommencèrent
à promener leurs doigts autour de mes poignets, cherchant à me faire
comprendre ce que je ne pouvais deviner. Où voulaient-ils donc en venir?
Leurs froides menaces étaient sans doute pour me démontrer qu’ils me les
couperaient. Dès ce moment, toute l’horreur de ma position me fut
révélée; j’inclinai ma tête sur ma poitrine, et je fermai les yeux. La
vue seule de ces monstres suffisait pour donner le courage du martyre;
j’attendais la mort non sans épouvante, du moins avec résignation.
J’étais dans cette cruelle perplexité, lorsque je me sentis frapper sur
l’épaule; c’était Than-Sing qui, touché de mon attitude, voulut calmer
mes craintes: «N’ayez pas peur, me dit-il, ils veulent seulement vous
effrayer pour que vous n’ayez aucune envie de détacher vos compagnons.»

On vint bientôt le chercher pour parler au chef des pirates. Than-Sing
n’avait pas été enchaîné, mais il était prisonnier comme nous; il nous
servit d’interprète ainsi qu’à ses compatriotes. Ce chef était un petit
homme d’apparence grêle, et chose singulière, il avait l’air moins
féroce que les autres.

Le capitaine Rooney fut interpellé devant lui; son attitude pendant cet
interrogatoire fut calme et dédaigneuse; il était superbe de mépris
devant tous ces hommes de sang. On lui demanda d’abord s’il était
Anglais; Than-Sing, chargé de traduire la réponse, se souvint, alors, de
la haine qui existait entre la nation chinoise et la nation britannique.
Il répondit que le capitaine était Espagnol, et que l’équipage se
composait d’hommes de différents pays. Le marchand chinois avait été
heureusement inspiré en dissimulant l’origine du capitaine et des
matelots, car le chef des pirates fit observer que si nous avions été
Anglais, il nous aurait tous fait égorger sur-le-champ. Il s’informa du
nombre d’individus qui étaient à bord, ainsi que des sommes d’argent
dont pouvait disposer le capitaine; si j’étais la femme de M. Rooney.
Than-Sing satisfit à toutes ces questions, et dit, relativement à ma
personne, que j’étais Française, simple passagère et sans aucun parent
ou ami en Chine. Cet excellent homme fit ressortir l’abandon dans lequel
je me trouvais, afin d’éloigner de l’esprit des pirates l’idée de ne me
rendre la liberté qu’au prix d’une forte rançon.

Le chef de ces bandits ordonna qu’on déliât les mains au capitaine
Rooney, et celui-ci eut l’humiliation de l’accompagner dans une visite à
l’intérieur du navire. Il se vit dans la nécessité de faire le compte
exact des marchandises qui composaient le chargement du _Caldera_. Nos
chambres furent dévalisées les premières; je vis passer mes bagages, qui
allaient disparaître dans leurs jonques; je soupirai tristement en
voyant ces voleurs de mer emporter avec mes malles des objets auxquels
j’attachais un prix tout particulier: un de ces barbares tenait dans
leur cage mes oiseaux mignons. Ces frêles petites créatures allaient
peut-être, si elles n’offraient pas assez d’appât à la cupidité de ces
monstres, mourir de faim, leur sort était aussi misérable que le nôtre.
Nous devions la vie au généreux mensonge du marchand chinois. Mais les
pirates pouvaient changer de résolution, et nous eussent-ils promis cent
fois la vie sauve, nous ne pouvions pas nous appuyer sur leur perfide
parole. Notre malheur, au contraire, semblait sans limites; il était
parfaitement à notre connaissance que les mers de la Chine regorgent de
cette écume des nations. Ceux-ci nous faisaient grâce; de nouveaux venus
pouvaient nous disputer aux premiers et compromettre par ce motif même
notre vie, dans une lutte horrible.

Je fus tirée de cette rêverie douloureuse par le retour du capitaine. Le
chef des pirates venait de lui ordonner de faire lever l’ancre et de
diriger le navire vers une baie voisine. Nos matelots furent, en
conséquence, délivrés pour être employés aux manœuvres; avant d’en
arriver là, on leur fit comprendre qu’au moindre signe de révolte de
leur part, on nous égorgerait tous sans pitié: ces menaces étaient
répétées à chaque instant. Quant à moi, que ma faiblesse condamnait à
l’inaction, je fus laissée à la même place, en compagnie du matelot
blessé, lequel souffrait cruellement. Le subrécargue et Than-Sing,
quoiqu’on leur eût délié les mains, étaient restés inoccupés à cause de
leur inexpérience des manœuvres.

A ce moment, un des bandits passait près de nous; il nous fit voir, avec
les marques de la joie la plus vive, un paquet assez volumineux:
c’étaient une forte somme d’argent, des bijoux et de l’argenterie. Il
prit une fourchette, la retourna en tout sens, puis la porta à sa tête
en me regardant, comme pour me demander si c’était un peigne de femme
(on sait que les Chinois ne font pas usage de fourchettes). Son
ignorance, qui, dans tout autre instant, m’eût semblée risible, ne me
donna pas même l’envie d’un sourire, tant mes sens étaient plongés dans
un accablement profond. Than-Sing me vint heureusement en aide, et se
chargea de lui expliquer à quoi servait l’ustensile en question. Le
pirate s’éloigna. Je me croyais débarrassée de sa présence, quand,
revenant sur ses pas, il remplit une de ses mains de pièces d’argent
qu’il mit sous mes yeux en étendant son autre main vers une jonque qui
était amarrée au navire; je compris, à ces signes multipliés, qu’il me
proposait de fuir avec lui. Thang-Sing, qui avait suivi du regard cette
scène muette, eut encore pitié de ma détresse; il s’approcha de cet
homme et lui dit quelques mots dans leur langage. Il le menaçait sans
doute de dévoiler sa conduite au chef, car le pirate s’éloigna la tête
basse et sans réplique.

La température s’était refroidie et était même devenue des plus
glaciale. Nous étions trop peu couverts les uns et les autres pour ne
pas ressentir cette brume humide qui nous enveloppait. Je dois dire ici
que nos ennemis usèrent alors de quelque générosité à notre égard;
plusieurs d’entre eux ramassèrent des lambeaux de vêtements qui
traînaient sur le pont et nous les jetèrent pour nous en couvrir les
épaules.

A ce moment, un bruit de chaînes se fit entendre, le navire ne marcha
plus, l’ancre tomba dans la mer; devait-elle bientôt remonter ou
s’enfonçait-elle à jamais dans le lit qu’elle se creusait au fond des
abîmes? Dieu seul le savait!




CHAPITRE VI

     Séquestration.--Le bon Chinois.--Une lueur d’espoir.--Nouvelle
     flottille de jonques.--Déguisement.--Plus de vivres.--Pirate père
     de famille.--Proposition de fuite.--Refus de l’équipage.--Fureur du
     capitaine Rooney.--Embarcation à la mer.--Désappointement.


Les dernières ténèbres fuyaient pour faire place à l’aurore. Le chef des
pirates ayant terminé ses recherches sur les choses les plus précieuses,
nous fit tous rassembler, après quoi il ordonna qu’on nous fit descendre
à l’entrepont, cette nouvelle mesure nous causa une inquiétude affreuse;
on nous escortait les armes à la main. Arrivés au pied du grand mât, le
panneau fut ouvert, et nous descendîmes comme on nous l’intimait. Nos
ennemis à ce moment avaient l’air des plus farouches, chacun de nous
pensa qu’ils allaient décider de notre sort; nous nous assîmes, dans un
morne silence, sur les ballots de marchandises; mais elles étaient en si
grand nombre dans cet endroit que nous trouvâmes bien juste à nous
caser. Peu après, plusieurs de ces pirates apparurent pour nous
surveiller. Ils frappaient à chaque instant et sans motif, à coup de
plat de sabre, les matelots. Je me serrais tout effarée contre le
capitaine, lequel pouvait bien peu pour soutenir mon courage. Ces
misérables regardaient les poignets de chacun, et une joie sauvage
brillait dans leurs yeux en voyant la meurtrissure qu’avaient marquée
les liens. Ils faisaient sans cesse tournoyer leurs sabres autour de nos
têtes. Un mouvement se fit sur le pont; ils se retirèrent, nous laissant
seuls, mais ils avaient eu le soin de boucher hermétiquement le panneau,
de sorte que non-seulement nous étions plongés dans d’épaisses ténèbres,
mais encore nous étouffions faute d’air. Ce supplice dura environ une
heure. Au bout de ce temps, une voix amie parvint jusqu’à nos oreilles:
c’était celle de Than-Sing qu’on avait séparé de nous. Il ouvrit ce
panneau qui pesait sur nos têtes, et les rayons d’un soleil ardent
vinrent bientôt inonder la nuit de notre prison avec un éclat tel, que
nous restâmes comme aveuglés pendant quelques instants.

Comme on a pu le voir jusqu’à présent, le marchand chinois nous avait
rendu de grands services; jusqu’au jour de notre délivrance, il devait
être notre bon génie. Sa seule présence calmait nos terreurs, et le
danger nous semblait moins menaçant dès que le vieillard ouvrait la
bouche pour s’interposer entre notre faiblesse et la férocité de ses
compatriotes. Son sang-froid ne se démentait pas un seul instant; quand
il n’était pas à nos côtés pour nous consoler et ranimer notre courage,
il employait son adresse auprès de nos ennemis pour nous épargner
quelque nouvelle épreuve. Nous reprenions confiance à sa vue, et sa
laideur disparaissait sous la calme sérénité de son visage; j’étais
étonnée de trouver dans un homme de sa nation une bonté toute
chrétienne.

Le chef des pirates avait décidé que tous nos hommes d’équipage
travailleraient au pillage du navire. Nous supposâmes qu’un long débat,
qu’une question de vie ou de mort avait dû être agitée relativement à
nos personnes, pendant qu’on nous avait tenus enfermés. La Providence
veillait sur nous, puisque, cette fois encore, on nous laissait
l’existence.

Les pirates commencèrent par se gorger de la cargaison d’opium, qui
était le fret de notre ami Than-Sing; le reste, consistant en riz,
sucre, café, etc., fut l’ouvrage de nos matelots; mêlés au milieu de ces
voleurs, ils passaient de main en main toutes les marchandises qui se
trouvaient à leur portée; et, ces derniers, faisant la chaîne, les
transportaient à leur tour, dans leurs joncques.

Dans cette nouvelle occupation, je fus comme oubliée, c’est-à-dire qu’on
me laissa au milieu de mes compagnons qui m’engagèrent à rester à leurs
côtés, ce que je fis en désespérée.

Au bout d’une heure, il y eut un moment de repos, les pirates donnèrent
du biscuit et de l’eau à nos matelots. Ceux-ci me proposèrent de prendre
part à leur repas, mais il me fut impossible de goûter à cette pâte dure
et sèche. D’ailleurs, mon estomac, oppressé par tant d’émotions, était
incapable de prendre quoi que ce fût. Je bus avec avidité de l’eau qu’on
me présentait; depuis de longues heures, j’avais la poitrine en feu, et
je souffrais cruellement de la soif.

A peu de temps de là, le capitaine Rooney et Than-Sing vinrent me
chercher. Il était temps qu’ils fissent leur apparition. Plusieurs de
ces bandits commençaient à tourner autour de nous d’une manière
inquiétante. Ces cœurs généreux, au milieu de tant de périls, ne
songeaient pas qu’à eux seuls; après en avoir fait la demande au chef,
ils avaient obtenu de m’emmener dans une des chambres de la dunette pour
m’y établir plus commodément. En passant sur le pont, je pus voir que
nous étions près de terre, dans une immense baie entourée de collines
verdoyantes. J’aurais joui de ce riant spectacle, si, en ramenant mes
regards autour de moi, je n’avais été bientôt rappelée à toute l’horreur
de ma situation. Le _Caldera_, déjà détruit par la tempête, n’était plus
qu’un amas de ruines; les mats brisés étaient abattus en travers du
pont, des débris de fenêtres et de portes gisaient çà et là, la boussole
avait disparu; ces pillards par mesure de précaution avaient enlevé le
gouvernail. Ils ajoutaient à cette scène de désolation leurs cris
barbares. Saisie de vertige, je me laissai vivement entraîner à
l’arrière. Là encore, tout était méconnaissable, ce qui n’avait pas été
brisé comme les glaces, était jeté de tous côtés sur le plancher. Je ne
sais si, à ce moment, j’avais bien ma raison; mais, ce que je puis dire,
c’est que je souffrais mille morts. J’étais torturée moralement par les
craintes les plus odieuses. J’essayais de combattre les angoisses que
j’éprouvais, en me rappelant que les pirates s’étaient refusé de me lier
les mains, ce qui me semblait témoigner de leur part une certaine
déférence pour les femmes; mais il me revenait à l’esprit bien des
histoires lugubres qu’on m’avait racontées et qui constataient la
férocité de leur nature. Aussi, j’eusse préféré me jeter vingt fois à la
mer que d’être victime de leurs brutalités; et à l’heure où j’écris ces
lignes, on peut croire que si je raconte tout au long les souffrances
que j’ai endurées, c’est que Dieu, dans sa paternelle sollicitude, n’a
pas permis que de telles horreurs fussent ajoutées au nombre des
épreuves qu’il me réservait. J’y eusse succombé; du reste tant le nombre
des ennemis qui nous tenaient en leur pouvoir était considérable, le
lendemain de notre capture, nous pouvions en compter amplement un mille.
Je me reposais en proie à ces sombres préoccupations, sur un large divan
en velours vert qui était resté dans une des chambres et qu’on n’avait
pu faire sortir à cause de sa dimension. J’étais veillée par le bon
Than-Sing et par le brave capitaine Rooney. Quant au subrécargue, homme
à la figure fausse, il a montré tant de lâcheté dans cette affaire,
qu’il ne mérite aucunement d’être cité.

Pendant toute cette journée, nos matelots n’eurent pas de relâche, ils
travaillaient sous le sabre en poussant des gémissements, leur fatigue
était grande; vers le soir, Than-Sing obtint pour eux qu’ils prendraient
quelque repos; il parvint aussi à nous apporter une gamelle de riz cuit
à l’eau. C’était tout ce qui restait de nos vivres: ils en mangèrent;
quant à moi, de même que le matin, je ne pus rien prendre. Ces émotions
successives me tenaient dans un état de fièvre qui m’ôtait toute idée de
nourriture.

Nous avions obtenu de fermer toutes les portes; mes compagnons
reposèrent dans la pièce voisine de celle où j’étais. Je passai une nuit
comme les damnés seuls doivent en avoir; j’entendais les cris de ces
hommes célébrant leur facile victoire, et les frayeurs de mon cerveau
troublé ne me faisaient voir que poignards, incendies et scènes
sanglantes. Voulant respirer un peu d’air, je me précipitai, toute
haletante, vers une petite fenêtre qui donnait sur la mer, et
j’apercevais à la clarté de la lune les forbans qui se partageaient le
butin dans le plus grand tumulte. Ce spectacle était bien fait pour
perpétuer mes affreuses visions.

Le jour vint. Il y avait à peine une heure que nos matelots étaient
parmi les Chinois, lorsque nous entendîmes une rumeur qui n’était pas
ordinaire. En effet, quelques-uns des nôtres vinrent à pas précipités,
et nous dirent avec une voix troublée: «Les pirates se sauvent!... les
pirates se sauvent!...» Une lueur d’espoir traversa en ce moment
l’esprit de chacun de nous; nous crûmes un instant que nous touchions au
terme de nos épreuves, car l’effroi subit des pirates nous semblait ne
devoir être causé que par l’approche d’un steamer; mais nous fûmes
trompés d’une manière bien douloureuse quand nous eûmes porté nos
regards à l’horizon. Hélas! ce que nous avions cru être notre délivrance
n’était, au contraire, qu’un accroissement à nos maux. Il n’y avait plus
à en douter; au loin une nouvelle flottille de jonques se dirigeait à
toutes voiles vers nous. Pendant l’espace d’un quart d’heure, où nous
fûmes seuls sur notre navire, le bon Than-Sing nous expliqua que les
petites jonques fuyaient devant les grandes, et que, s’il n’en était pas
ainsi, les pirates se livreraient combat entre eux. Les nouveaux ennemis
qui nous arrivaient étaient donc plus redoutables que les premiers.
Qu’allaient-ils faire de nous? Nous étions là, sans espoir, attendant le
poignard, la hache ou le sabre qui devaient nous frapper peut-être; nous
comptions les minutes qui s’écoulaient, et mes yeux ne pouvaient se
détacher de la vue des jonques qui rapprochaient nos bourreaux; je
sentais une pâleur livide me couvrir le visage; ce n’était pas la peur
de la mort elle-même qui me rendait faible en ce moment, mais celle des
horreurs de toute nature dont je pouvais être la victime. «Capitaine,
dis-je, j’ai peur, oh! bien peur! Ne pourriez-vous pas me faire changer
de costume? Voyez ma robe! et ces monstres qui vont venir! je voudrais
être vêtue comme vous. Que faire? Ayez pitié de moi.» Le capitaine
Rooney me regarda avec compassion. «Oui, vous avez raison, me dit-il,
attendez.» Et il me présenta un double pantalon qu’il avait sur lui;
puis, il me donna une chemise et une jaquette en toile de Chine. Je
rentrai dans une cabine où je me débarrassai de ma robe, seul vêtement
qui me restât, et je m’habillai à la hâte; un des matelots me donna sa
casquette, sous laquelle je dissimulai le mieux que je pus ma chevelure.
Une seule épingle à cheveux me restait encore, et des souliers dans
lesquels mes pieds étaient nus.

A peine avais-je fini d’opérer cette transformation que des cris partant
de toute part nous annoncèrent l’approche de nos nouveaux ennemis. Ils
montaient à l’abordage. Pendant ce temps-là les autres jonques, plus
petites que les nouvelles, fuyaient à leur approche, comme des
sauterelles effarées qu’on aurait surprises dévastant un champ de blé;
nous nous réfugiâmes dans l’une des chambres de l’arrière. Le capitaine
avait ordonné à ses hommes de se grouper de manière à me cacher aux
premiers regards de l’ennemi; lui-même me masquait de sa personne, et
Than-Sing se tenait à mes côtés. Il y avait bien en ce moment une
quarantaine de jonques autour du _Caldera_. Chacune portait de vingt à
quarante hommes, et les plus grandes avaient dix ou douze canons.

Chaque jonque a un chef qui commande despotiquement à une troupe de ces
forbans, enrôlés sous l’étendart du vol et de l’assassinat. Les pirates
qui infestent les lointains parages de la Chine ont pullulé d’une telle
sorte dans cet empire de quatre cent millions d’âmes qu’ils exercent
impunément leurs actes de brigandage. Il arrive même souvent qu’ils se
pillent et se tuent entre eux dans des combats à coups de canons, où la
victoire reste avec le butin à ceux qui ont les jonques les mieux
armées. Comment peut-il en être autrement dans ce pays, qui n’a pas la
moindre marine organisée pour les détruire?

Nous étions réfugiés, ainsi que je l’ai déjà dit, dans une des chambres
du fond; comme une digue rompue, en un instant un torrent de ces
barbares s’abattit sur notre navire. Les premières jonques n’ayant pu
emporter qu’une faible partie du chargement, les nouveaux pirates
faisaient encore une bonne prise avec ce qui restait de marchandises;
ils s’occupèrent donc à piller la cargaison sans paraître prendre garde
à nous. L’appât du butin semblait seul captiver leur attention. Celles
de leurs jonques qui étaient suffisamment chargées se détachaient des
autres, et faisaient voile vers les côtes pour transporter leur prise
dans des villages qui leur servaient de repaire. Tous ces misérables
semblaient également animés du même esprit de destruction. Ainsi, dans
le but d’emporter le plus de choses qu’ils pouvaient, ils brisaient tout
avec une rage insensée; ils démolissaient à coups de hache les parois
des cabines; dans la dunette, les parois volaient en éclats; le cuivre,
le fer et le plomb étaient arrachés des panneaux et des portes
enfoncées. Ils étaient parvenus à enlever le divan en velours vert qui
avait été épargné jusqu’alors, à cause de sa grandeur; les planchers
étaient jonchés de débris de thé, de café, de sucre, mêlés à des
morceaux de biscuit, etc. L’indifférence qu’ils nous témoignèrent tout
d’abord, ne dura pas longtemps. Il nous fallait à tout moment montrer la
doublure de nos poches pour leur prouver que nous ne leur dérobions
rien; la foule de ces monstres fut un instant tellement compacte en se
ruant sur nous, qu’ils faillirent nous étouffer. La seule robe qui me
restait lors de leur arrivée, et que j’avais essayé de cacher, me fut
enlevée comme tout le reste. Than-Sing ayant quitté un instant ses
souliers, ils lui furent dérobés en un clin d’œil, ce qui chagrina fort
le pauvre homme; ces chaussures étaient confectionnées à la mode de son
pays. Un matelot parvint tant bien que mal, un peu plus tard, à lui en
arranger une paire avec des morceaux de cuir qu’il découvrit dans des
débris de toutes sortes.

Notre position au milieu de ces hommes dénaturés était horrible; aussi
l’égarement se peignait-il sur nos physionomies. Mon costume n’avait pu
les tromper; ma figure, sur laquelle la douleur était empreinte d’une
manière si profonde, leur divulgua sans doute mon sexe, car ils me
considéraient avec une curiosité avide.

Plusieurs d’entre eux nous demandèrent d’un air railleur si nous
pensions toujours aller à Hong-Kong; comme nous restions silencieux et
abattus, ils se mettaient alors à rire avec des éclats bruyants.
Quelques-uns, aux regards cruels et féroces, s’approchaient de nos
matelots et faisaient le simulacre de leur couper la tête. Mourante de
frayeur, je me faisais aussi petite que possible en me blottissant au
plus épais de mes compagnons. A quoi tenait notre existence au milieu de
ces êtres sans pitié et sans loi? Qui sait ce qui serait arrivé à la
première goutte de sang, ne fût-elle tombée que d’une égratignure?

Cette avalanche humaine vint pourtant à s’éclaircir. Vers le soir de ce
même jour, nos matelots, à moitié morts de fatigue, se plaignirent
amèrement de la faim. Il nous vint un secours tout à fait inattendu.
Parmi ces pirates, il y en avait un qui semblait avoir quelque pitié
pour nous, il apparaissait de temps à autre et nous considérait en
silence, puis il se plaisait à nous montrer dans l’une des jonques sa
femme et ses enfants. Nous prêtâmes involontairement quelque attention
aux êtres qui lui étaient chers. Ce pirate, père de famille, voulut
alors nous témoigner le plaisir qu’il en ressentait, car, au moment où
nous déplorions notre dénûment, il nous apporta du riz et une marmite
pleine d’un ragoût arrangé à la mode chinoise; ce mets était surtout
remarquable par une sauce jaune comme du safran. Nos matelots, peu
habitués aux douceurs du confortable, s’en régalèrent. Il n’y eut que
moi qui y touchai du bout des lèvres; il me fut impossible d’en avaler
deux cuillerées; je lui trouvais une saveur capable de provoquer les
vomissements. Je mangeai un peu de riz pour calmer les atroces douleurs
d’estomac que je commençais à ressentir.

Than-Sing, depuis un instant, causait avec cet honnête brigand, quand il
vint nous dire, à notre grande surprise, qu’il lui proposait, moyennant
une forte somme d’argent, de nous faire évader; une telle proposition ne
pouvait avoir d’autre effet que d’être bien accueillie. Le capitaine,
par l’entremise de Than-Sing, convint avec cet homme du prix de notre
liberté, du lieu où nous déposerait la jonque et où il toucherait la
rançon. Ce devait être à Hong-Kong. Ce projet arrêté, il s’éloigna en
promettant de nous avertir quand l’heure propice à notre fuite serait
arrivée.

L’imagination fait de si rapides progrès dans un moment critique, que je
me laissai aller à croire que nous allions être sauvés. Aussi, je
portais, malgré le mal éprouvé déjà, des regards reconnaissants sur
cette jonque amarrée près de nous. J’examinais d’un œil avide tout ce
qui s’y passait, et je voyais sous les derniers rayons d’un beau soleil
couchant des enfants jouer, courir, se chamailler; des femmes chinoises,
des femmes pirates je devrais dire, qui faisaient l’office des
matelots, en s’employant aux manœuvres. Deux d’entre elles portaient un
jeune enfant sur leur dos dans un sorte de sac d’étoffe, ce qui ne les
gênait pas le moins du monde pour grimper comme des chats, partout où
elles étaient utiles. Les têtes nues de ces enfants, que les mères
portent ainsi jusqu’au jour où ils peuvent marcher, ballottaient,
allaient, venaient de tous côtés, que cela faisait peine à voir. Mais
peut-on rien changer aux coutumes? Cette habitude semi-barbare, ce qu’il
y a de certain, ne les empêche pas de croître, et encore bien moins de
multiplier. J’achevais à peine ce raisonnement en moi-même, qu’un de ces
bambins se laissa choir par-dessus le bord. Malgré moi, je jetai un cri.
Inutile de dire qu’il fut bien vite retiré de l’eau. Je pus voir alors
que cet enfant avait des petites vessies remplies d’air attachées à ses
vêtements. Les parents prennent ces précautions afin que s’ils viennent
à tomber dans l’eau, ils n’aillent pas si vite au fond.

Or, cette jonque sur laquelle, à tort ou à raison, nous avions quelque
espoir, prit le large.

Avions-nous été l’objet d’un jeu cruel? ou bien éprouvés
traîtreusement? C’est ce que nous ne pûmes savoir. Toujours est-il, que
nous ne revîmes pas notre pirate. Nous finîmes par croire qu’il avait
été retenu par la crainte de voir sa trahison découverte, ou d’être
rejoint dans le cours de l’évasion par les autres jonques. Il avait
pensé peut-être aussi que la somme qui lui était offerte ne compensait
pas suffisamment le danger de mort auquel il s’exposait en nous tirant
des mains de ses complices.

La nuit étant tout à fait venue, les jonques se détachèrent peu à peu
des flancs du _Caldera_ et gagnèrent le large. Il n’était pas probable
qu’il en revînt en aussi grand nombre, car, de retour dans les villages,
elles ne manqueraient pas d’annoncer que notre navire était complètement
vide de sa cargaison.

Leur départ nous laissait la perspective d’une nuit plus calme que les
précédentes; mais, d’un autre côté, nous restions sans ressources sur
notre navire délabré. Qu’allions-nous devenir? Au loin, devant nous,
était Macao, on en voyait la direction entre deux montagnes; que de
désespoir à cette vue! La vie était là, si près de nous, et nous ne
pouvions rien pour notre salut. Quand même nous eussions essayé de
lever l’ancre et de laisser dériver au hasard le navire dépouillé de sa
mâture, toutes nos chances ne nous permettaient que d’échouer sur la
côte. Pour échapper aux angoisses nouvelles que nous ressentions, nous
fîmes nos préparatifs afin de prendre quelque repos, c’est-à-dire que
chacun s’étendit tant bien que mal sur le plancher, assez près les uns
des autres, de manière à être tous debout à la moindre alerte. Mes
compagnons me réservèrent un mauvais banc que les pirates avaient
dédaigné, et sur lequel je m’étendis à mon tour avec résignation.

Quel tableau! une mèche fumante brûlait dans un peu de graisse et jetait
des lueurs blafardes sur toutes ces figures amaigries par la souffrance.
Cette chambre, si fraîche et si coquette quelques jours auparavant,
avait maintenant l’aspect d’un de ces hideux caveaux des _Mystères de
Paris_. Tous ces matelots avec leurs costumes salis et souillés par le
travail, aux teints hâlés, aux mains rudes et noires, étaient navrants à
voir; et quand je pense que je ne faisais aucun contraste avec ces
hommes par les vêtements dont j’étais vêtue; par le danger qui me
tenait rivé sous sa griffe, comme eux, j’avais un pied dans la tombe.
Voyant chacun s’endormir peu à peu, je restai seule à songer aux chances
horribles de ma destinée. Je cherchais dans mes souvenirs quelle faute
j’avais pu commettre pour endurer de telles épreuves; je fouillais ma
conscience, je creusais mon esprit pour en trouver qui valût mes
souffrances; je ne voulais pour douter de la bonté divine.

Il pouvait être dix heures du soir; les bruits du dehors s’apaisaient
peu à peu, et malgré moi, je me sentais agitée par mille pensées
diverses. Je ne comprenais pas alors que des hommes pussent dormir sans
songer davantage à leur salut. J’éprouvais comme une surexcitation
nerveuse; je me levai et me dirigeai en silence vers le pont, en passant
à travers les débris qui m’arrêtaient à chaque pas. Là, je m’appuyai le
long du bord. Nous étions seuls! La mer ne faisait pas entendre le plus
léger bruit; elle étincelait comme un miroir d’argent sous les pâles
rayons de la lune. Cette calme solitude me fit une émotion telle que
toutes les fibres de mon cœur furent émues. Je rentrai à l’intérieur de
la dunette et j’appelai à voix basse le capitaine. Il n’était
qu’assoupi, car il tourna vivement la tête de mon côté. Je l’engageai à
me suivre sur le pont, ce qu’il fit aussitôt, assez étonné de mon air
mystérieux. Quand nous fûmes là, nous nous arrêtâmes pour écouter un
bruit de voix qui venait de l’avant. C’était une petite jonque dont les
pirates étaient encore occupés à prendre les débris du chargement. Le
capitaine se pencha par-dessus le bord pour calculer les hommes qu’elle
contenait; ils pouvaient être huit à dix. Après cet examen il resta
silencieux. Il paraissait réfléchir. Etonnée de son silence, je
l’entraînai vers la grande embarcation qui occupait le milieu du pont,
et, la lui montrant, je lui dis: «Eh bien! capitaine, vous laissez
dormir vos hommes!» Il me regarda, cherchant à lire l’intention que
j’attachais à mes paroles. Je repris aussitôt: «Voulez-vous donc
attendre patiemment la triste fin qui nous est réservée, en ne faisant
rien pour échapper aux mains des pirates? Je ne suis qu’une femme, moi:
eh bien! j’aimerais mieux aller au-devant de la mort et tenter quelque
chose pour mon salut, que de l’attendre ici du poignard ou de la faim.
Nous ne sommes qu’à vingt milles de Macao; cette embarcation peut tous
nous contenir; une fois en mer, il est peu probable que les pirates,
gorgés comme ils le sont, épient notre fuite ou essayent de nous
atteindre. Partons! fuyons! capitaine, je vous le demande à genoux.

Il se pencha de nouveau par-dessus le bord, puis me faisant signe de le
suivre, il rentra dans l’intérieur de la dunette où les autres
semblaient dormir profondément. «Holà! dit-il, que tout le monde se
lève!» Il communiqua alors ses intentions; car, dans ce moment suprême
où il fallait risquer sa vie, il ne pouvait guère donner des ordres. Au
premier mot qu’il dit pour dévoiler le plan de l’évasion, les matelots
se resserrèrent les uns contre les autres, avec un air d’improbation et
de désobéissance. Cette marque d’hésitation mit aussitôt le capitaine en
fureur; et, s’adressant surtout au subrécargue et à son second: «Vous
n’êtes pas des hommes, leur dit-il, et vous devriez rougir en voyant une
femme, la première, vous donner l’exemple du courage: oui, la première,
elle a pensé à braver la mort qui nous attend, en voyant dans une fuite
quelque chance de salut; et vous, vous hésitez, vous tremblez comme des
lâches! car je vois la peur dans tous les yeux. Non, je le répète, vous
n’avez pas l’énergie d’une femme!»

Je dois dire ici quel était le plan d’évasion du capitaine Rooney. Il
venait de proposer à son équipage de sortir sur le pont et de tenter,
par la surprise, de se rendre maître de la jonque en égorgeant les huit
Chinois qui s’y trouvaient. Alors, sans perdre de temps, la mer nous
favorisant, nous faisions voile sur Macao, où il nous était possible
d’arriver la nuit, selon toutes ses prévisions.

Je me gardai bien de dire une parole qui fût une approbation au milieu
de ces débats sinistres; mon rôle, en cette circonstance, devait être
simplement passif, afin que ces hommes ne pussent croire que j’avais
proposé ou applaudi à une tentative de meurtre. Leur réponse au
capitaine me fit voir qu’ils m’accusaient d’avoir eu cette idée
sanguinaire; et, pourtant, je certifie que ce genre de coup de main ne
m’était pas venu à la pensée. Le capitaine ne m’avait pas fait part de
ses projets; mais il n’avait pas douté de mon courage, puisque, la
première, je lui avais donné l’idée de fuir. Il avait donc jugé à propos
de me citer en exemple afin de leur faire honte.

Le subrécargue prit la parole en me jetant un regard de reproche et de
menace tout à la fois. «Capitaine, dit-il, cette femme est folle, sans
doute, et si elle a pu vous conseiller une pareille témérité, vous
trouverez bon que nous vous refusions notre aide; cette tentative loin
d’avoir le succès que vous en attendez, il pourrait se faire, au
contraire, qu’elle tournât contre nous, parce qu’il est plus que certain
que nous serions surpris en mer avant le jour par les pirates, et cette
fois nous n’obtiendrions pas quartier d’eux; ils devineraient facilement
d’où nous vient la possession de leur jonque maudite.» Ces raisons, qui
combattaient le plan du capitaine, étaient justes; aussi parurent-elles
le convaincre; il proposa alors d’exécuter en partie le projet d’évasion
qui pouvait nous faire conquérir la liberté. Il s’agissait de démarrer
l’embarcation et de la débarrasser de la charge de charbon de terre dont
elle était remplie jusqu’à moitié. En ce moment, et comme pour favoriser
notre fuite, la dernière jonque qui était à l’avant du navire s’éloigna
et gagna le large; nous étions donc seuls pour la première fois depuis
le commencement de notre captivité, et nous pouvions travailler avec
plus de sécurité à notre délivrance. Pendant que tous les hommes se
livraient à ce travail, je montai sur le pont de la dunette, et là je me
mis à chercher dans les débris de toutes sortes qui gisaient à cette
place; la lune brillait dans son plein, elle me permit de découvrir
quelques-unes de mes lettres, toutes maculées et déchirées; je les
ramassai en poussant un douloureux soupir, et les serrai pieusement sous
mes habits, j’allai ensuite au milieu de mes compagnons. L’embarcation
fut bientôt débarrassée de la charge de charbon qui l’encombrait. Mais
les craintes du capitaine n’étaient que trop réelles; on s’aperçut que
plusieurs planches étaient disjointes et qu’elle ne pourrait tenir la
mer. Le désappointement fut grand; on redoubla néanmoins d’activité; on
ferma tant bien que mal ces trous, ces fissures qui s’opposaient à nos
projets. Enfin, après un travail des plus opiniâtres, au moyen de fortes
poulies, on parvint à hisser la chaloupe le long du bord. Un bruit sourd
s’ensuivit; elle touchait la mer. Nous étions tous penchés sur le
bastingage; la moitié du corps en dehors du navire, nous plongions nos
regards avec une anxiété fébrile dans le fond noir de ce grand canot,
demandant à Dieu qu’il ne nous abandonnât pas. Dix minutes s’étaient à
peine écoulées, que la voix du capitaine résonna comme un glas à nos
oreilles; il articula d’une voix sourde: «C’est impossible!» Et c’était
en effet impossible. L’eau, qui avait pénétré d’abord lentement, monta
peu à peu et remplit la barque à moitié. Chacun se retira en silence:
les grandes souffrances ne s’expriment pas. J’allai de nouveau m’étendre
sur le banc où, deux heures avant, j’avais cru à la possibilité de notre
salut. Il fallait remettre au lendemain l’espoir de nous sauver.

Le lendemain était le 10, les matelots se mirent à l’œuvre avec ardeur.
Cette embarcation nécessitait un travail de huit à dix heures au moins,
pour la rendre propre à notre fuite; encore fallait-il que nous ne
soyons point assaillis, comme dans la journée précédente, par de
nouveaux pirates. Une partie du jour se passa sans que nous aperçussions
la moindre voile; c’était presque du bonheur de nous voir ainsi isolés.
Nous parcourions en tous sens _le Caldera_, qui n’était plus qu’un amas
de décombres. Ce malheureux navire, vidé jusqu’à la cale, avait un
aspect hideux et misérable, et son délabrement faisait mal à voir: il
n’y avait pas un mètre carré où l’on pût mettre les pieds.

Comme tous les agrès de la chaloupe avaient été enlevés, on fut obligé
de les remplacer par de longs bambous qu’on parvint à découvrir dans la
cale; à l’aide de cordes, on adapta à ces mêmes bambous des planches
destinées à faire le service des avirons. Des morceaux de toile furent
ramassés, taillés et cousus ensemble pour faire une voile; tout marchait
au gré de nos désirs; la nuit était venue. Nous allions enfin partir,
lorsque nous aperçûmes deux jonques venant à pleines voiles dans notre
direction; elles eurent bientôt abordé; nous nous réfugiâmes au plus
vite dans nos cabines, après avoir fait disparaître, autant que
possible, toutes traces de nos préparatifs. Les pirates qui débarquèrent
vinrent d’abord s’assurer de notre présence; plusieurs d’entre eux,
portant des lanternes, nous les passèrent devant le visage, comme s’ils
cherchaient quelqu’un. L’inquiétude fit place à la terreur, lorsque
arrivés à moi, qui m’étais cachée derrière tous les autres, ils parurent
joyeux et satisfaits. L’un d’eux me fit signe de me lever; je les
regardais avec les yeux hagards, mais sans faire un seul mouvement. Un
autre, que mon inertie irritait sans doute, fit tournoyer son sabre
autour de ma tête. Ce geste menaçant ne pouvait qu’augmenter mon effroi,
et je ne sais ce que je serais devenue, si, à ce moment, un grand cri ne
se fût fait entendre et ne fût venu attirer leur attention..... Ce cri
provenait d’un des leurs qui s’était laissé choir à fond de cale par
l’ouverture de l’entrepont laissée ouverte. Les matelots qui se
trouvaient les plus rapprochés de cet endroit se hâtèrent d’aller le
retirer; ils le rapportèrent sur le pont à moitié mort. Cet incident
détourna l’intention qu’avaient les pirates de s’emparer de ma personne,
car ils ne donnèrent pas suite à leurs menaces; ils se contentèrent de
faire une perquisition à l’intérieur. Cependant, nous n’étions pas
encore au bout de nos alarmes; un matelot accourut tout effaré.
Plusieurs de ces maudits barbares, sous prétexte d’éclairer leurs
recherches, promenaient, de côté et d’autre dans l’entrepont, des
torches enflammées, et cela avec une indifférence qui marquait bien leur
intention cruelle; les étincelles volaient autour d’eux sur toutes
choses inflammables, et elles auraient certainement suffi à mettre le
feu au navire, si nos matelots ne s’étaient hâtés de les suivre, en
jetant de l’eau pour les éteindre à temps. A notre grande joie, ils
finirent par s’éloigner.

Quand ils furent à une assez grande distance, on se mit de nouveau à
l’œuvre; les agrès furent disposés dans la chaloupe; elle faisait encore
eau par certains endroits, mais il n’y avait plus à reculer. Personne,
du reste, en ce moment solennel, n’éprouva la moindre hésitation; il ne
s’éleva aucune objection à l’encontre de cette entreprise hasardeuse.
Chacun s’en remettait à la grâce de Dieu et acceptait d’avance, comme
une des plus douces fins de sa triste existence, la chance d’être
englouti au sein de cette mer lointaine, plutôt que de rester exposé à
mourir lentement dans les tortures de la faim, ou violemment du sabre
des pirates. Cependant, l’aspect du temps ne pouvait que nous ébranler
dans nos résolutions, si l’espoir de recouvrer la liberté eût été moins
vivace dans nos cœurs; en effet, le ciel, qui, depuis la dernière
tempête, avait gardé la plus grande sérénité, s’était peu à peu chargé
de nuages; le vent, qui jusqu’alors nous avait été propice, soufflait
maintenant en sens contraire et venait debout. La mer, comme si elle
s’opposait à nos projets, fouettait contre _le Caldera_ ses vagues, qui
semblaient autant de barrières impossibles à franchir. Le capitaine, à
ces signes de mauvais augure, hochait encore la tête; mais notre
décision était irrévocable. On procéda à l’embarquement; il était
difficile d’atteindre la chaloupe; le navire tirant beaucoup moins d’eau
par suite de la prise de son chargement, s’était haussé, de sorte qu’il
existait une distance énorme entre le pont et le canot. Aussi fallut-il
avoir recours à des cordes avec lesquelles on nous lia, le matelot
blessé et moi, afin de nous faire descendre sans accidents; les autres,
ayant l’habitude des manœuvres, se laissèrent glisser le long du bord,
et bientôt nous nous trouvâmes réunis au nombre de vingt-deux, prêts à
gagner la pleine mer.

Le capitaine se mit à la barre; le subrécargue, le marchand chinois, le
matelot malade et moi, nous nous assîmes près de lui. Comme nous avions
vent debout, il fallut renoncer à hisser la voile; dès les premiers
coups de rames, les matelots s’aperçurent qu’ils auraient à lutter. Des
lames courtes et serrées, poussées par des courants, s’opposaient à
notre marche. Un moment, je tournai les regards vers _le Caldera_; sa
noire silhouette semblait grandir à mesure que nous nous en éloignions;
elle se projetait dans le sillage de la chaloupe comme un bras immense
toujours prêt à nous ressaisir. Haut de bord sur les flots, notre navire
avait l’aspect sinistre d’un immense mausolée destiné à renfermer tous
les malheureux égarés sur cette mer funeste. Hélas! nous fûmes
impuissants à le fuir. Ces avirons improvisés rendaient le plus triste
service. A cause de leur mauvaise forme, ils n’avaient aucune prise dans
l’eau. Les vagues, en outre, entraient à profusion au point que quatre
hommes suffisaient à peine à rejeter l’eau à mesure qu’elle pénétrait;
le froid d’un vent glacial commençait à nous engourdir. Nous fîmes
jusqu’à trois milles dans ces tristes conditions; enfin, après quatre
heures de tentatives vaines, d’efforts surhumains, les matelots
déclarèrent que leur état de faiblesse ne leur permettait pas de faire
davantage pour le salut commun; c’était un arrêt du ciel: _le Caldera_,
que nous avions abandonné, nous forçait, pour ainsi dire, à revenir à
lui. Devions-nous donc finir nos jours sur ce navire maudit?
«Retournons!» dit le capitaine d’une voix rauque; et l’accent qu’il
donna à ce seul mot disait assez qu’il se regardait comme vaincu par la
fatalité. «Eh bien! retournons, capitaine, lui répondis-je; après tant
de souffrances, la mort ne peut qu’être douce.» Le courant, qui était le
seul obstacle à la réussite de notre entreprise, nous entraîna donc en
peu de temps vers notre point de départ et nous colla contre les flancs
du _Caldera_, que nous avions cru quitter pour toujours. La corde qui
avait servi à nous descendre pendait le long du bord; les matelots y
grimpèrent avec agilité, et, parvenus sur le pont, nous jetèrent de
nouveaux cordages à l’aide desquels, après mille difficultés, on nous
hissa, le matelot malade et moi.

Lorsque je me retrouvai sur ce plancher de malheur, je fus prise d’un
vertige, mes yeux se fermèrent, et je tombai lourdement; la vie
s’échappait en moi, épuisée, comme je l’étais, par la douleur et les
tortures de la faim. Mon évanouissement dura assez longtemps; en
rouvrant les yeux, je me vis étendue sur mon banc, enveloppée de
quelques morceaux de voiles. Chacun de ces hommes, pour me couvrir le
corps et me rendre un peu de chaleur, s’était défait d’un vêtement;
comme il n’y avait que de l’eau, ils m’en offrirent; ils me prodiguèrent
tous les soins qu’ils purent pour me rappeler à la vie: il m’eût été si
doux pourtant de mourir ainsi! Tous mes compagnons rangés autour de moi
me considéraient avec compassion; à travers la lumière enfumée, je vis
quelques-uns de ces hommes rudes verser des pleurs; ma vue réveillait
peut-être chez eux le souvenir d’une mère, d’une sœur, d’une femme ou
d’une fille, enfin de quelque être qui leur était cher. Des larmes
brûlantes coulèrent de mes yeux, car moi aussi je pensais à ma famille,
à la France que je n’espérais plus revoir.

Tout retomba bientôt dans le silence; on se groupa sur le plancher de la
petite chambre, et chacun s’y étendit de nouveau, attendant, dans un
repos sinistre, le réveil du lendemain.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ce lendemain était le 11; lorsque je m’éveillai, le jour commençait à
poindre; j’avais dormi quelques heures, et ce court sommeil avait
momentanément effacé le souvenir de mes souffrances. Mais je fus bientôt
rappelée à l’affreuse réalité; à peine avais-je les yeux ouverts, que
j’aperçus, à quelques pas de moi, plusieurs de ces hideux Chinois armés
de sabres et de pistolets. Than-Sing discutait au milieu d’eux: il
paraissait dans la plus vive agitation. Il y en avait un qui commandait
les autres, car il me désignait du doigt. Je considérais cette scène
avec stupeur, mais sans tressaillement de crainte, de longs jours de
jeûne et de si poignantes émotions commençaient à me faire perdre le
sens de ce qui se passait autour de moi. Than-Sing interpella le
capitaine Rooney, en lui disant: «Le chef que voici veut vous prendre,
ainsi que la dame française et moi, pour nous emmener à Macao; là, il
espère tirer de nous une bonne rançon.» Ce dernier, comprenant que cette
demande du chef des pirates équivalait à un ordre, ne répondit que par
un signe d’acquiescement. Aussitôt je fus saisie, secouée, entraînée sur
le pont. Je n’essayai même pas de me défendre contre cet enlèvement
subit, parce que, je le répète, ma raison, cette fois, se trouvait
comme ébranlée. Than-Sing dut obéir le premier; une mauvaise échelle qui
faillit se rompre au milieu servit à nous descendre. Arrivée sur la
jonque, je levai la tête sur _le Caldera_ pour voir si notre capitaine
nous suivait; mais je restai foudroyée d’étonnement; les pirates, après
s’être laissé glisser vivement à leur tour, par une manœuvre habile,
poussèrent au large sans prendre le capitaine Rooney. Ce qui se passa
dans mon être, en présence de ce coup inattendu, est inexprimable à
dépeindre. A mon départ, j’avais été recommandée aux soins de ce
courageux marin; dans le malheur qui nous accablait, il avait veillé sur
moi avec une touchante sollicitude. Lorsque je me vis séparée de mon
unique protecteur, que je me vis seule au pouvoir d’hommes barbares,
d’assassins redoutés pour leurs cruautés, je ne comprends pas, à l’heure
qu’il est, comment je ne succombai pas à tant d’épreuves; ne devais-je
pas me croire perdue, entièrement perdue? Je levai les bras vers mes
compagnons d’infortunes, en signe d’adieu éternel, et je pus voir encore
le capitaine Rooney. Penché sur le bord, il nous suivait du regard; sa
consternation, ou plutôt son désespoir paraissait grand, car il
s’écriait avec des gestes désespérés: Emmenez-moi! prenez-moi aussi! Et
tout à coup, comme s’il comprenait l’inutilité de ses efforts, il se
cacha le visage dans les deux mains; il pleurait peut-être?... Je lui
fus toujours reconnaissante de cet élan de pitié!

Il est peu de peuples, je crois, où la lâcheté, la fausseté, la
cupidité, la cruauté soient plus dominantes que chez les Chinois: les
sauvages, sous ces différents points, ont leur excuse, eux; car, s’ils
se rapprochent de la bête par leurs instincts, c’est que Dieu a voulu
qu’ils fussent marqués du sceau de l’ignorance. Tandis que la Chine,
entachée comme elle l’est dans ses mœurs perverses et vicieuses, a
possédé au plus haut degré la civilisation; elle a porté la lumière
quand nous étions encore dans les ténèbres. Cette décadence m’autorise à
faire ici quelques remarques judicieuses sur leur caractère.

Le Chinois, vil par nature, parle très-haut et très-fort quand il sait
qu’il est soutenu. Dans un moment difficile, il n’attaquera jamais son
adversaire en face, parce que la bravoure est un vain mot pour lui, et
qu’il ne sait pas ce que c’est que d’affronter un véritable danger. Ce
qu’il aime, avant tout, c’est un meurtre, une torture isolée, dont il
peut se repaître; une preuve à l’appui, c’est le plaisir qu’ont les
Chinois en général à tourmenter les animaux. On sait, en outre, qu’ils
ont droit de vie et de mort sur leurs enfants. Les nouveau-nés, soit
parce qu’ils sont malingres ou chétifs, sont souvent étouffés ou jetés à
l’eau, ou, ce qu’il y a de plus affreux encore, égorgés et laissés à
l’abandon sur un fumier où ils pourrissent. On rencontre les pauvres
créatures dans une rue, sur une place, au milieu d’un champ, quelquefois
à moitié rongées par la voracité des chiens, des chats, des corbeaux,
des porcs, lesquels sont toujours à l’affût d’une telle proie. C’est
surtout les filles que l’on sacrifie ainsi; les garçons à leur entrée
dans le monde sont au contraire salués d’une bienvenue; car le devoir
d’un fils est de donner aide et protection à son père lorsqu’il devient
caduc.

Ceci a un côté moral qui ne manquerait certainement pas d’éloges, si les
mœurs et coutumes des Chinois sur leurs enfants en général pouvaient
être compensées.

Désormais la proie de ces monstres, et connaissant à fond leur
barbarie, ne devais-je pas me considérer entièrement perdue?

La jonque fuyait toujours!

Quelques minutes s’étaient à peine écoulées, lorsqu’on nous fit entrer
dans une petite cabine qui servait de chambre au capitaine des pirates,
lequel avait l’air tout joyeux de notre capture. Il apprit à Than-Sing
que le capitaine Rooney allait être dirigé sur Hong-Kong ou Macao; que,
là, il devrait traiter de sa rançon et de la nôtre, mais qu’il ne nous
relâcherait que s’il trouvait la somme de notre rachat suffisante. Il
ajouta que, dans sept ou huit jours, nous rencontrerions la jonque avec
laquelle il s’était donné rendez-vous; jusque-là, il nous fallait
demeurer en otages.

Peu de temps après, on nous fit remonter sur le pont. Je jetai les yeux
avec anxiété autour de moi pour voir si j’apercevrais encore notre
navire; mais nous en étions déjà fort éloignés, il avait disparu.
Parvenus à l’arrière, deux Chinois enlevèrent un panneau en bois de la
dimension de deux pieds carrés, servant d’entrée à un petit réduit, dans
lequel on nous enjoignit de descendre. Que l’on juge des tortures
nouvelles qui nous étaient réservées: dans cet étroit espace, il nous
était impossible de nous tenir debout; nous nous assîmes, nos têtes
touchaient au plafond; nous essayâmes de prendre une position meilleure
en nous allongeant tout de notre long, à peine avions-nous de quoi
étendre nos jambes. Le panneau étant ouvert, toute la lumière du jour
entrait, et nous voyions le ciel; une fois notre prison fermée (ce que
l’on fit un instant après que nous y fûmes), nous n’avions de jour que
par une lucarne de huit pouces carrés, qui donnait sur l’endroit où se
mouvait le gouvernail; pas un souffle d’air n’y parvenait, à moins que
l’on n’ouvrit la trappe, et ce soulagement semblait ne pas devoir nous
être souvent accordé.

Je fis quelques questions à Than-Sing sur les projets de nos ennemis; il
me dit qu’il ne fallait croire à aucune de leurs paroles; il fallait que
le digne homme fût bien désespéré pour mettre aussi peu de précautions à
me préparer à toutes les catastrophes. Il y avait tout au plus une
demi-heure que nous étions là, lorsqu’un bruit sourd retentit au-dessus
de nous; Than-Sing et moi nous nous regardâmes avec quelque surprise,
ce bruit devenait plus distinct, on semblait clouer le panneau qui nous
recouvrait; une pâleur livide me couvrit le visage. Sans nous dire un
mot, la même pensée nous était venue à tous deux: c’était notre tombeau
que les pirates fermaient en ce moment! Ils nous avaient pris pour nous
laisser mourir lentement par le manque d’air, d’eau et de vivres. Un
frisson mortel me parcourut tout le corps. Il doit en être ainsi, me
disais-je, lorsqu’on est cloué vivant dans un cerceuil. J’étendis les
bras et j’essayai de soulever de mes faibles mains ce panneau qui pesait
sur nos têtes; mes efforts restèrent impuissants. Oh! alors, j’eus un
véritable désespoir. Cette idée, qu’il me faudrait endurer les tortures
d’une horrible agonie et voir celle de mon compagnon, ébranlait ma
raison. Je voulais me briser la tête contre les parois de mon cachot; je
voulais me débarrasser de cette vie maudite: la folie commençait à
s’emparer de mon cerveau brûlant. En ce moment, deux mains pressèrent
les miennes, c’étaient celles de Than-Sing; le malheureux me regardait
avec des yeux baignés de larmes. Il m’exhortait, avec de douces paroles,
au calme, à la résignation; je voyais, sur son visage, des pleurs
couler lentement. Moi aussi je pleurais en songeant que j’étais au
pouvoir de ce peuple cruel qui exècre tout ce qui n’est pas lui. Nous
passâmes ainsi deux heures; au bout de ce temps, le panneau qui fermait
notre cellule fut enlevé comme par enchantement. Le grand jour nous
frappa au visage, nous étions inondés des rayons du soleil. Après les
tortures morales que je venais d’éprouver, je compris que c’était une
épreuve à laquelle ces êtres dénaturés nous avaient soumis. Ils
jouissaient, en ce moment, du mal qu’ils supposaient nous avoir fait;
ils passaient leur visage par l’ouverture et riaient méchamment en nous
regardant. Comme ils allaient refermer encore le panneau, Than-Sing les
supplia de le laisser entr’ouvert pour renouveler l’air; ils y
consentirent et l’écartèrent de trois pouces, ce qui nous donna en même
temps un peu de jour.

Vers le soir, on nous apporta un petit baquet qui contenait de l’eau
pour que nous pussions nous laver les mains et le visage. Ma faiblesse
était si grande que ma tête me semblait lourde à porter; aussi, mon
premier mouvement fut la plus complète indifférence, mais l’offre de
ces ablutions n’était pas sans motif. Une provision de riz, de poisson
et de thé nous fut apportée. Le pauvre Than-Sing rayonnait de plaisir.
«Mangez, me dit-il, il ne faut pas que nous ayons l’air de les
craindre.» Ces mots me décidèrent. Je pris, avec une certaine émotion,
ce peu de nourriture; mais mon estomac était tellement délabré qu’après
de grands efforts, c’est à peine si j’avais pu manger une demi-soucoupe
de riz; je bus du thé, et ce fut tout, quand il pouvait être huit
heures. Un sabbat infernal se fit entendre; je me bouchai les oreilles.
C’était l’instant de la prière. Il y a en Chine diverses religions,
celle qui entraîne le plus de superstitions, d’idolâtrie est le
bouddhisme. La religion de Confucius est, dit-on, la plus sensée, aussi
est-elle le culte des savants, des hommes éclairés. Les Chinois font
leurs invocations à l’aide des cymbales et des tams-tams. J’aurai plus
tard occasion de parler de ces bizarres cérémonies.

La nuit étant tout à fait venue, les pirates firent monter Than-Sing sur
le pont. Il vint quelques minutes après me dire que je pouvais y monter
comme lui, pour prendre l’air. Nous étions alors mouillés dans une
petite baie, non loin de terre. Plusieurs joncques étaient à l’ancre à
peu de distance de la nôtre. On y célébrait aussi la prière; le son des
gongs, des tams-tams arrivaient jusqu’à nous. Ce moment de liberté me
fit du bien. Je reposais avec délices et amertume tout à la fois ma vue
vers l’horizon; la mer était calme, et le ciel rempli d’étoiles les plus
brillantes. J’aurais oublié les souffrances de ma captivité durant ce
court instant où la nature bienfaisante semblait vouloir me consoler,
s’il ne m’eût fallu bientôt rentrer dans ma prison.

J’avais de longues heures pour penser à moi-même. Quelles n’étaient pas
mes craintes en songeant que j’allais fermer les yeux au milieu de ces
hommes sans foi ni loi! Je me sentais heureuse d’avoir un compagnon
d’infortune auquel son âge prêtait, dans ces heures d’affliction, un
caractère tout paternel.

Quoique Than-Sing fût Chinois, j’avais pris confiance en lui, car sa
constance était inébranlable; il cherchait à soutenir ma misère par des
paroles de consolation. C’était pour moi un réel protecteur: «Tant qu’il
sera à mes côtés, me disais-je, il éloignera peut-être les lâches
tentatives de ces hommes sanguinaires; il saura, par sa persuasion,
déjouer leurs mauvaises intentions. Et puis, pensai-je, si je suis
délaissée de Dieu, je saurai bien trouver une nuit pour me jeter à la
mer.»

Telles étaient mes noires réflexions, lorsqu’on nous apporta de la
lumière, c’est-à-dire une petite mèche enflammée dans un récipient
rempli d’huile. Malgré la faible clarté qu’elle répandait, elle me
permit d’inspecter les extrémités de ce petit caveau. J’avais à peine
jeté les yeux autour de moi que je poussai un cri; je rentrai mes
jambes, mes épaules, je me pelotonnai enfin pour ne pas toucher les
planches qui nous entouraient. Je voyais courir, le long des parois, de
grosses araignées velues à longues pattes, d’énormes cancrolats, des
cloportes monstrueux avec de grandes cornes, et jusqu’à des rats qui
s’enfuyaient dans les coins en glissant sur mes jambes. Ces barbares,
voyant ma répulsion, ma douleur, étaient dans la plus grande joie; ils
se plaisaient à nous montrer, en les désignant du doigt, toutes ces
bêtes immondes. Than-Sing, voyant ma répugnance, voulut éteindre la
lumière, mais je l’en empêchai; j’aimais mieux voir ces animaux hideux,
afin de pouvoir les repousser, plutôt que d’en sentir le contact au
milieu d’une nuit profonde. Il me restait un mouchoir; je m’enveloppai
la tête et cachai mes mains sous mes vêtements en me tenant immobile.

Le lendemain matin, à l’approche du jour, toutes ces bêtes horribles
avaient disparu. On vint bientôt nous apporter des vivres; d’abord, un
petit baquet et de l’eau pour nous laver le visage et les mains, c’est
une coutume chez les Chinois de ne toucher à la nourriture qu’après
s’être livré à une ablution. Notre repas se composait, comme la veille,
de poisson, de riz et de thé; il me fit voir, cette fois, comment il
fallait se servir des ustensiles qui remplacent la cuillère et la
fourchette, et dont les Chinois se servent avec une dextérité toute
particulière. Ce sont de petites baguettes longues d’un pied et de la
grosseur d’un crayon; on en tient deux ensemble vers le milieu, avec le
bout des doigts, comme si l’on voulait écrire, et c’est avec les
extrémités opposées à la main qu’on saisit les aliments pour les porter
à la bouche. J’éprouvais alors une telle difficulté à faire usage de ces
petites baguettes, malgré tout ce que s’efforçait de me démontrer
Than-Sing pour m’en servir, que je renonçai à leur usage et employai mes
doigts seuls pour manger.

Des pirates vinrent, comme le jour précédent, se pencher au-dessus de
notre cellule pour nous considérer à leur aise. Ils se montraient les
uns aux autres nos tristes personnes, et, par moment, il s’élevait de
leur groupe de grands éclats de rire; un de ces misérables se pencha
plus que les autres, et, nous regardant en riant d’un air sardonique, il
désigna la place du marchand chinois et la mienne, en simulant, avec les
bras, les gestes de deux personnes qui s’embrassent. A cette lâche
insulte, un mal poignant me saisit au cœur; l’idée d’un danger honteux
m’apparut et me fit monter le rouge au visage. Je laissai couler mes
larmes en abondance; mon chagrin était profond: à quoi n’étais-je pas
exposée! Le capitaine pirate apparut en ce moment; je ne sais s’il fut
touché de mon affliction, mais il fit fermer le panneau. Par un hasard
des plus singuliers, ce chef, contrairement à ses compagnons de
brigandage, avait quelque chose d’affable dans la physionomie, et je
dois avouer que, chaque fois que je l’envisageais, je ne me sentais
saisie d’aucun mauvais pressentiment. Il était d’une laideur originale,
si l’on peut dire: son visage était long et grêle; il avait les
pommettes saillantes, un nez retroussé avec de larges narines, des
sourcils épais, une grande bouche et de très-grands yeux noirs; lorsque
son regard se fixait il s’arrêtait lentement et semblait toujours
exprimer une douce pensée, comme s’il eût toujours exprimé une douce
pensée. Comme tous les Chinois, il était rasé jusqu’au sommet de la
tête, il avait une épaisse et longue natte de cheveux qu’il portait
parfois, à la mode des sauvages, en chignon noué et retroussé, ou bien
enroulée en forme de couronne, ou tombante jusqu’aux talons; chaque
coiffure lui donnait une physionomie différente, mais ces diverses
expressions lui étaient toujours favorables.

Or, l’apparente modération qu’il montra dans cette circonstance me fit
espérer pour l’avenir.

Than-Sing, en cherchant à apaiser mes craintes, me fit part de toutes
les questions que ces misérables lui avaient adressées. Ces maudits,
pour s’amuser à ses dépens, lui avaient demandé combien il avait de
femmes. La religion permet aux Chinois la polygamie, mais ils n’en
abusent pas comme les mahométans. Les grands dignitaires en ont, dit-on,
jusqu’à dix ou douze. Seulement dans les corps mixtes de la société,
pour le négociant, par exemple, il en est à peu près de même. Le
Chinois, en s’établissant, prend une femme; sa maison vient-elle à
prospérer, qu’il en prend deux, trois et plus; c’est pour lui un signe
de richesse. La première a un droit plus légitime que les autres, et ne
peut être répudiée; à elle le titre de mère pour tous les enfants qui
surviennent des femmes supplémentaires, des petites femmes, comme les
désignent les Chinois maris. Ces dernières donnent à leurs nouveau-nés
des soins maternels mais domestiques tout à la fois, car ils doivent le
respect et l’obéissance à la première épouse. Les pauvres n’en ont
qu’une. Pour en revenir à mon ami Than-Sing, ils lui disaient donc avec
raillerie, que si l’on n’offrait pas de nous une forte rançon, ils
feraient de lui un pirate, et de moi la femme de l’un d’eux. Cette
horrible confidence fut de nouveau pour moi un sujet de désolation; mais
le pauvre marchand chercha encore à me consoler, en me faisant observer
que tout ce qu’ils lui avaient dit n’avait été qu’une feinte pour le
faire parler, attendu que les hommes de sa nation ne pouvaient prendre
femme que parmi celles de son pays. «Ainsi, ayez soin, ajouta-t-il,
lorsque vous m’adresserez la parole de ne pas porter la main sur moi,
car ils pourraient le remarquer et me faire un mauvais parti, voyant
dans cette formalité une violation de cet usage.» Ces derniers mots me
rassurèrent, et mes appréhensions précédentes se dissipèrent peu à peu.
Il avait aussi répondu à toutes leurs instances pour connaître sa
position, qu’il n’était qu’un pauvre homme allant chercher fortune en
Californie, et qu’il avait obtenu un passage à bon marché à bord du
_Caldéra_, avec les matelots. Il s’était bien gardé de leur laisser voir
qu’il avait de l’aisance, de peur qu’on ne le soumît à quelques tortures
et qu’on élevât de beaucoup le chiffre de sa rançon; car il n’est pas
d’atrocités que ces écumeurs de mer ne puissent commettre pour
satisfaire leur cupidité. Et les habitudes de ces pirates lui étaient
trop connues pour qu’il ne craignît pas à chaque instant pour notre
existence. Cet estimable Chinois me parla ensuite de sa famille; il
habitait Canton, il n’avait qu’une femme, me disait-il, et trois
filles, une de huit, dix-huit et vingt-cinq ans. L’aînée était mariée.
Il paraissait les aimer tendrement, car il versait d’abondantes larmes à
leur souvenir; il conservait peu d’espoir de les revoir un jour; je dois
même dire que mon compagnon d’infortune ne croyait aucunement à notre
délivrance. Toutes les fois que je le questionnais sur les mœurs des
pirates, il me répondait toujours qu’ils aimaient à couper des têtes.

A ce point de la conversation, je m’arrêtais avec un certain
frissonnement, car je savais par ouï dire combien le sang était répandu
à profusion dans cet abominable pays, même de par la loi. Ainsi la peine
capitale est une mort des plus douces comparée aux supplices qui
s’exécutent chaque jour dans le Céleste-Empire. Un criminel ou condamné
politique est jeté parfois dans un cul de basse fosse jusqu’à ce qu’il y
pourrisse, qu’il y meure de faim; une victime doit-elle être étranglée,
on lui crève les yeux, on lui coupe les oreilles, comme si la
strangulation elle-même n’était qu’une légère punition. Un autre, on
l’écorche vif ou on l’enterre presque vivant. Celui-là, on broie ses
membres ou bien on l’écartèle; celui-ci lié et serré entre deux
planches, on le scie du haut en bas.

Toutes ces horreurs ne soulèvent-elles pas le cœur, rien qu’à les
énumérer? Lorsqu’elles se présentaient à mon esprit, un nuage voilait ma
vue, comme au bord d’un précipice; je me sentais prise de vertige,
j’étais au-dessus d’un abîme sans fond.

Ce jour là, les pirates demandèrent quels étaient mon nom, mon âge et
mon pays. Than-Sing, à ces questions inoffensives, répondit que j’étais
Française et qu’on m’appelait Fanny. Ces brigands recueillirent ces
détails avec une curiosité toute joviale, car ils se plurent à répéter
sur tous les tons: Fanny, Fanny. Mon nom, sortant de la bouche de tels
êtres, me faisait un effet indéfinissable, je ne pouvais en croire mes
oreilles.

Le soir venu, comme j’éprouvais une grande fatigue de ma séquestration,
Than-Sing demanda qu’on me permît de rester sur le pont un peu plus
longtemps qu’à l’ordinaire. On y consentit, et ce fut pour moi une
occasion d’être témoin de leurs cérémonies religieuses.

Chaque jonque (comme chaque habitation chinoise) a un autel dressé, sur
lequel brûle une quantité de petites bougies et où se trouvent déposées,
en guise d’offrande, des portions de vivres. La prière a lieu chaque
soir à la même heure; elle commence par une musique qu’on exécute au
bruit des cymbales et des tams-tams, ce qui fait un vacarme effroyable.

Je vis un jeune Chinois apporter deux épées qu’il fixa par la pointe sur
le milieu du pont; il déposa auprès un plateau garni de soucoupes, un
vase plein de liquide et plusieurs feuilles de papier couleur jaunâtre;
ces dernières étaient destinées à être brûlées.

Le jeune coquin, après avoir rangé toutes ces choses, suspendit à l’un
des mâts une lanterne allumée; le chef des pirates apparut bientôt; il
se prosterna, avec le sérieux dû à la circonstance, devant cet autel
improvisé. Je suivais malgré moi cette comédie bizarre, je regardais
avec des yeux plus grands que l’étonnement ce prêtre bandit; il baisait
à chaque instant le plancher de la jonque, ou bien élevait des petites
bougies en l’air. Au bout d’un instant, il saisit entre le pouce et
l’index un vase plein de liquide et l’avala, le liquide, pas le vase; il
frappa ensuite des médailles l’une contre l’autre, en faisant les
contorsions les plus drôles; à ce moment, les instruments firent
entendre leur tapage: c’est que la flamme commençait à consumer les
précieuses feuilles de papier. Ce chef religieux les promenait autour
des épées, comme pour les bénir. Lorsqu’elles furent à moitié brûlées il
se dirigea à l’arrière de la jonque et les lança à la mer. Cette fois la
musique cessa, la prière était achevée.

Cette cérémonie avait duré environ vingt minutes, et j’avais profité de
tout ce temps pour respirer l’air frais de la soirée.

Une fois rentrée, j’essayai de prendre quelque repos, mais je ne pouvais
en trouver. Les insectes qui nous infestaient, et desquels je ne pouvais
me préserver, me privaient de tout sommeil; je n’avais pas de bas, le
dessus de mes pieds était couvert de leurs morsures. Les rats, qui, les
premiers jours, s’étaient bien gardés de nous approcher, commençaient à
s’habituer à nous, ils se hasardaient en plein jour à passer sur mes
jambes.

Le 13, au matin, un incident vint troubler nos ennemis et les mettre en
rumeur: un des leurs était tombé à la mer, ils se hâtaient, à l’aide de
cordages, de lui porter secours. Après quelques difficultés, ils
parvinrent à le retirer, mais il était complétement asphyxié. De
l’ouverture de notre case, je voyais le moribond, il était assez près de
nous pour que l’eau qui dégouttait de son cadavre se répandît dans notre
cellule; ces méchants êtres, avec ou sans intention, l’avaient appuyé
sur le panneau qui laissait une légère ouverture. Il paraît qu’on
s’était aperçu trop tard de sa disparition, car tous les efforts tentés
pour le rappeler à la vie furent vains, bien qu’on le frictionnât à lui
arracher la peau. Après un quart d’heure de tumulte, nous entendîmes des
imprécations, et le bruit d’une masse lourde qui tombait dans la mer.

C’en était fait de ce misérable.

Notre jonque continuait sa route, louvoyant le long des côtes. Le 15,
elle fit la rencontre d’une flotte de pirates; tous se réunissaient pour
donner la chasse à une jonque marchande qu’on apercevait au loin sous le
vent et qui faisait le trajet de Hong-Kong à Canton avec des passagers.
La nôtre se mit de concert avec eux pour l’attaquer. Oh! alors, les
heures de repos étaient passées, car l’activité la plus grande
commençait à régner à bord.

Than-Sing entendait tous ces bandits discuter leurs plans d’attaque pour
la nuit suivante et calculer les chances de profit qu’offrirait le
butin. Ils s’apprêtaient à rentrer dans la vie de pillage et de carnage
qui était leur élément. Je vivais dans une anxiété impossible à décrire;
je me demandais quel serait notre sort si nous étions faits prisonniers
par de nouveaux pirates, plus cruels peut-être que les premiers.

Le soir venu, nous fûmes enfermés hermétiquement dans notre réduit. Il
pouvait être dix heures, lorsque des cris pareils à ceux que nous avions
entendus sur _le Caldera_ retentirent dans l’air. Ils ne tardèrent pas à
être suivis de plusieurs détonations lointaines, c’était le bruit du
canon. Ces échos sinistres arrêtèrent les battements de mon cœur. Plus
morte que vive, je songeais à l’imminence du danger. Un boulet ne
pouvait-il pas venir nous fracasser dans notre retraite obscure! Cette
première détonation avait eu pour effet d’amener un profond silence à
notre bord. Que pouvaient faire nos geôliers pendant l’interruption de
leurs cris féroces? Ils se préparaient à la riposte, car deux coups
successifs partant de notre jonque faillirent me rendre folle; à cette
détonation, tout sembla frémir dans les profondeurs de ce petit navire.
Les trépignements, les hurlements quelque peu interrompus recommencèrent
de plus belle; cette attaque durait depuis une heure ou deux, lorsque
nous entendîmes les canots emporter une partie de nos voleurs. Ces
vautours couraient sur leur proie, en peu de temps ils fondirent sur
cette jonque, et la mirent au pillage. Surprise à l’improviste, cette
dernière n’avait pu se mettre en garde, ni faire une sérieuse
résistance, nous le supposâmes du moins en entendant cesser le feu; en
outre, les bourdonnements extérieurs qui nous arrivaient, nous faisaient
deviner aisément que nous étions tout proche de cet abordage.

En somme, les pirates paraissaient avoir remporté la plus facile des
victoires.

Nous étions tellement suffoqués par la chaleur que Than-Sing essaya de
soulever le panneau qui nous recouvrait; mais aussitôt on le referma
avec violence, au risque de lui briser la tête. Le marchand chinois
achevait à peine de faire cet effort, que nous entendîmes de longs cris
de douleur. Ils nous parvenaient d’une manière si effrayante dans
l’obscurité, que poussions malgré nous des exclamations. Au comble de la
frayeur, je pressai Than-Sing de questions, je voulais qu’il m’en
expliquât la cause. Mais il garda un morne silence, et, comme
j’insistais, il me répondit pour la première fois avec mauvaise humeur:
«Je ne sais pas.» Le brave homme, dans la crainte de m’affliger, me
raconta le lendemain seulement la scène horrible qui se passait alors,
et que je vais essayer de décrire.

Les pirates, après l’abordage de la jonque marchande, avaient
brutalement fouillé tous les passagers. Plusieurs de ces malheureux,
ayant eu l’imprudence de dire qu’ils venaient de la Californie, furent
bientôt victimes de la rapacité de ces monstres. Dans le but de leur
faire avouer la somme de leurs richesses, on les flagella de la manière
la plus hideuse, plusieurs furent attachés par le pouce de l’un des
pieds ainsi que par celui de l’une des mains à une corde qui roulait
dans une poulie fixée au grand mât, et leur corps, suspendu par les
extrémités délicates, fut mis en mouvement de haut en bas et de bas en
haut, avec des secousses si brusques, si violentes, qu’elles arrachaient
aux victimes ces cris de souffrances qui étaient parvenus jusqu’à nous.
Souvent, après une ascension suivie d’une chute rapide, on les frappait
encore avec un bambou. Bien que Than-Sing n’eût pas été témoin de ces
horribles scènes, il connaissait trop bien les mœurs de ces brigands
pour n’avoir pas compris de suite à quel genre de cruautés ils se
livraient. De plus, leur langage cynique dévoilait sans honte les crimes
qu’ils se plaisaient à commettre.

Le jour apparut, les clameurs cessèrent insensiblement, et l’on
n’entendit plus que le clapotement de la mer le long de la coque du
navire et le bruit des canots transbordant le butin; une partie du jour
fut employée au pillage de la cargaison.




CHAPITRE VII

     Désespoir.--J’écris la date de ma captivité.--Apparence de bonté
     des pirates.--Un joyeux repas.--Un steamer en vue.--Fuite des
     pirates vers la montagne.--Coups de canon sur notre
     jonque.--Reconnaissances.--Hourra! Hourra!--Je suis sauvée.


Avec le jour, nous avions espéré que l’on nous donnerait un peu de
liberté, mais il n’en fut rien. Les pirates reçurent à bord les
marchands avec lesquels ils font commerce de troquer en mer les
marchandises volées, et tout préoccupés par l’appât du gain, ils
semblaient nous oublier complétement. Mon séjour dans ce réduit
insalubre avait fait sortir sur tout mon corps des petits boutons rouges
et gros comme des têtes d’épingles; la sueur coulait de mon visage, il y
avait si longtemps qu’on nous tenait enfermés dans cette atmosphère
suffocante que j’étais pour ainsi dire asphyxiée. Étendue sur les
planches de mon cachot je poussais de douloureux gémissements; ma
souffrance était grande, mon compagnon essayait par de douces paroles de
relever mon courage, mais je n’avais pas la force de lui répondre. Après
vingt-quatre heures d’un pareil supplice, un son métallique parvint
jusqu’à nous. C’étaient ces dignes émules de Mandrin qui vidaient entre
eux leurs comptes. Nous entendîmes verser des sacs, et le bruit que
faisait l’argent en tombant dans les balances, car, outre les dollars,
on se sert en Chine d’argent pur et non monnayé; ce métal en barres ou
en petits morceaux est reçu par tout le commerce.

Tous les receleurs s’en allèrent à la fin. Nos geôliers ne redoutant
plus qu’on nous découvrît, se souvinrent de nous, il était temps! Ils
entr’ouvrirent notre panneau à moitié, et nous respirâmes à pleins
poumons: j’aspirai avec délices la fraîcheur de l’une des nuits les plus
belles que j’aie vues dans ces lieux lointains.

Le lendemain était le 17; le jour qui se levait était brillant et
splendide; les pirates vinrent à la première heure, à notre grand
étonnement, enlever tout à fait notre panneau. Ils paraissaient joyeux
et semblaient vouloir nous être agréables comme à des amis qu’une
circonstance fâcheuse aurait forcé de négliger un moment. L’heure du
déjeuner venue, ils nous apportèrent à manger avec plus d’abondance
qu’ils ne l’avaient fait jusqu’alors et nous offrirent du vin. Cette
boisson est faite avec du riz fermenté; elle est claire comme de l’eau,
et possède un petit goût suret qui rappelle un peu le vin nouveau de
France.

Comme la jonque marchait en vue d’une côte déserte, les pirates
n’avaient aucune crainte relativement à nos personnes. Ils laissèrent
donc, pour la première fois, notre cellule ouverte tout le jour; ils
engagèrent Than-Sing à monter sur le pont, et cela avec une affabilité
qui nous surprenait. Aussi, malgré la frayeur, la répulsion que
m’inspiraient ces hommes, j’avais envie de le suivre. J’avais tant
souffert pendant ces deux jours qu’ils m’avaient tenue sous le
séquestre, que c’était pour moi un bonheur plein d’ivresse, de pouvoir
jouir librement des rayons du soleil. Mon sang se vivifiait peu à peu;
je me sentais revivre, enfin. Ne pouvant résister plus long-temps au
désir de me tenir debout et de voir encore une fois la terre, je me
dressai sur mes jambes et me trouvai de la sorte la moitié du corps en
dehors de notre prison. Oh! comme c’était délicieux! après avoir vécu
sept jours dans un cachot noir et sale; je promenais avec émotion mes
regards dans l’espace, et je voyais à l’horizon les coteaux d’une riche
verdure, dont les reflets étincelaient sous un beau soleil d’or. Au
milieu de cette végétation apparaissaient par instants de blancs
villages qui semblaient des points de broderie sur un long ruban vert.
La vue de ce paysage éclatant de lumière me remplit l’âme d’une joie
ineffable: je croyais revoir quelques beaux sites de ma patrie, de la
France! J’étendis les bras vers cette terre qui fuyait devant nous, et
des larmes, que je ne pus retenir, inondèrent mon visage. Le chef des
pirates passait en ce moment; il fallait que mon désespoir fût bien
profond: je lui montrai la terre avec un geste expressif. Le bon
Than-Sing, qui avait suivi avec intérêt toutes mes impressions,
s’approcha de lui et se hâta de lui expliquer ce qu’il avait compris;
c’est-à-dire que je lui demandais de nous rendre la liberté, la vie.
Cette question coïncidait avec une circonstance qui pouvait entraîner
pour nous de nouveaux hasards. La jonque qui était partie à Macao,
emmenant notre capitaine pour traiter de notre rançon, n’était pas
encore revenue. Elle était en retard d’un jour. Le chef des pirates me
fit signe de la main de me calmer, et il dit à Than-Sing que, si dans
cinq jours il ne se rencontrait pas avec la jonque qui avait dû aller à
Macao ou à Hong-Kong, il nous ferait passer sur une autre qui nous y
conduirait; il se refusa à nous donner plus d’éclaircissements sur notre
avenir. Cette réponse vague ne fit que nous jeter dans une plus grande
perplexité. Quel pouvait être, sur notre sort, l’effet d’une pareille
décision? Ils nous mettraient sur une autre jonque, c’est-à-dire que, ne
pouvant retirer aucun prix pour notre rançon, s’ils ne nous tuaient pas,
ils se débarrasseraient de nous en nous exposant à de nouveaux dangers.

L’apparition subite d’un steamer, en admettant que le hasard nous fît
trouver sur sa route, était encore plutôt un motif de crainte que
d’espérance, car les pirates, sur le point d’être atteints, et plutôt
que d’être pris en flagrant délit de rapt, ne préféreraient-ils pas
nous jeter, mon compagnon et moi, à la mer, pour éviter d’être pendus,
punition que notre présence entre leurs mains devait à coup sûr
entraîner? On voit ainsi à quel point se compliquait notre situation et
qu’elle devait amener un dénoûment prompt, mais impossible à prévoir.

Le capitaine, lequel avait la voix enrouée d’une manière affreuse par
les cris sauvages qu’il avait poussés la veille; lequel, d’après
l’opinion de Than-Sing, était le plus horrible scélérat; lequel suait
l’assassin par tous les pores, puisque des victimes, laissées à moitié
mortes à cet instant, le maudissaient sans doute, me force encore une
fois, à dire qu’il avait une grande bienveillance répandue dans la
physionomie. Il m’engagea à monter sur le pont, si je devais m’y trouver
mieux; je ne pouvais qu’accueillir avec joie cette proposition; ma vie
s’était étiolée dans l’ombre. Pour la première fois, je me mis à
regarder, sans trop de dégoût, ces hommes qui m’avaient torturée; je me
trouvais si heureuse de sentir la brise du matin m’effleurer le visage,
que je retrouvai assez de sang-froid pour observer ce qui se passait
autour de moi. Tous ces pirates allaient et venaient sur le pont d’un
air joyeux; ils s’occupaient à partager entre eux les dépouilles des
infortunés qu’ils avaient pillés la veille. A ce spectacle hideux, mes
yeux ne se détournèrent pas, mon cœur n’éprouva pas la moindre émotion.
J’avouerai à ma honte que j’étais tout entière au contentement égoïste
que je ressentais de ne plus être enfermée.

Je me reposais sur un petit escabeau que l’on m’avait offert.

Ce gibier de potence levait de temps à autre les yeux sur moi, si ce
n’était l’un, c’était l’autre qui me regardait, mais, non plus, d’une
manière sardonique ou menaçante; il y avait, si je puis m’exprimer
ainsi, dans leur joie, dans leurs évolutions, presque de l’enfantillage.
Ils se plaisaient à me montrer différents objets qui leur passaient par
les mains, comme font les enfants à une poupée, qu’ils veulent amuser.
La lâcheté est si grande chez les Chinois, que la moindre bravoure leur
en impose; je ne veux pas dire ici que j’ai été brave, car je perdrais
le charme naturel qui appartient à la femme; ce que je veux dire, c’est
que mon attitude, désespérée sans aucun doute, mais ferme au milieu
d’eux, enlevait à leur goût sanguinaire une partie de son âcreté. Je
dois le croire du moins, en rapportant les paroles de Than-Sing qui
causait avec eux: «Ils me disent qu’ils vous aiment, parce que vous avez
un doux visage et des yeux qui expriment la bonté, et ils ajoutent que
maintenant ils n’ont plus le désir qu’il vous arrive du mal.» Devais-je
croire que j’avais paralysé la barbarie de ces hommes, ou n’est-ce pas
plutôt que l’habitude de me voir à toute heure du jour, ma faiblesse
même, avaient été autant de motifs pour arriver à me traiter avec moins
de rigueur? D’un autre côté, leur cupidité me sauvegardait des excès de
leurs instincts brutaux et cruels; et quand je pense que j’ai vécu au
milieu de ces hommes, seule et abandonnée, je ne puis en croire mes
souvenirs.

Après être restée environ deux heures sur le pont, je rentrai de ma
propre volonté dans ma cellule. Je ressentis une lassitude extrême, que
je m’expliquais par la séquestration que j’avais subie les jours
précédents. Je m’étendis sur mes planches; elles me semblèrent moins
dures qu’à l’ordinaire; enfin, je ne sais pourquoi je ne me sentais pas
aussi malheureuse. Je promenais mes yeux au hasard sans qu’aucune
pensée occupât réellement mon esprit, lorsque j’aperçus un vieux livre,
tout sale, que j’avais déjà remarqué; il était écrit en allemand, langue
qui m’était inconnue; mais, bien que ce livre ne pût m’être d’une grande
distraction, j’aimais à le retourner en tous sens, parce que c’était la
seule chose qui me rappelât l’Europe. Il me vint alors à l’idée de
tracer sur une des feuilles, restée blanche, un court résumé de ma
position; j’avais encore, au milieu de mon dénûment, une épingle à
cheveux; je la pris entre mes doigts, et, me servant de la pointe,
j’écrivis, sur la page restée blanche, ce qui suit: «J’ai été prise par
des pirates chinois sur _le Caldera_; ils me retiennent prisonnière. Je
suis Française. Nous sommes au sixième jour, 17 octobre 1854.» Et je
signai mon nom: «Fanny Loviot.» Puis, sur une autre page, j’écrivis la
même chose en anglais. Pouvais-je espérer que ce livre servirait jamais
à guider les recherches qu’on ferait peut-être pour me retrouver? Hélas!
je calculais peu alors les probabilités; je caressais des illusions qui
me voilaient toute l’horreur de ma situation; c’était pour moi une
consolation de rêver à la France, à la liberté. Du moins, me disais-je,
si je ne dois pas être délivrée, ce livre servira peut-être, après ma
mort, à punir nos assassins. Je ne m’en tins pas là; à l’aide d’un
mauvais clou je gravai le plus lisiblement qu’il me fut possible, dans
le cadre de bois intérieur qui recevait le panneau, mes deux noms et
celui du _Caldera_. Chaque lettre avait au moins un pouce.
L’inscription, où elle était écrite, devait sauter facilement à la vue.

J’éprouvais dans cette occupation une vague inquiétude, car les pirates
allaient et venaient sur le pont et jetaient souvent des regards de mon
côté; mais ils ne se doutaient pas que ce que j’écrivais pouvait suffire
à les faire pendre tous, si cela tombait sous des regards ennemis. Après
ce travail, je me reposai. Tout un monde de pensées s’agitait dans ma
tête; je rêvais à la possibilité de voir se réaliser ce que mon esprit
venait de me suggérer; et, pour la première fois, machinalement, je me
mis à approprier mes ongles, qui étaient longs et noirs, avec un petit
fêtu de bois que je déchirai le long d’une planche; jusqu’alors je
m’étais refusé ce soin superflu dans mon état de détresse et d’abandon.
Où donc courait ma pauvre imagination, pour que j’en vinsse ainsi à
m’occuper de ma personne? Profitant de la permission qui m’avait été
donnée, je remontai sur le pont. Les pirates continuèrent à me faire
bonne mine. Plusieurs d’entre eux s’occupaient à détacher le petit canot
qui était le long du bord. Ils allaient pêcher des huîtres à quelques
brasses plus loin. Ce jour-là était, à ce qu’il paraît, une sorte de
fête pour eux, car leur cuisinier, autour de ses fourneaux, semblait
fort préoccupé de l’importance des plats qu’il avait à préparer. Il y
avait un quart de porc, tournant dans une broche, qui se dorait à la
flamme d’un brasier ardent, et de délicieux petits poissons avec
l’éternel riz que l’on versait à profusion dans des plats. Tous ces
préparatifs aiguisaient notre appétit. Quand vint l’heure du repas, nous
nous retirâmes discrètement dans notre réduit.

Mais quelle ne fut pas notre surprise! non-seulement on ne ferma pas
notre panneau, mais encore nous vîmes les pirates se ranger autour de
notre case que le jour éclairait en plein, et s’asseyant sur le
plancher, à la manière des Orientaux, ils se mirent en devoir de faire
honneur à ce fameux repas. Le cuisinier commença à faire passer à
chacun une portion de ces huîtres qui avaient mis tout l’équipage en
révolution. (Ces huîtres, pour la grosseur et la qualité, peuvent être
comparées à celles que nous appelons ici _pied de cheval_). Than-Sing et
moi nous ne fûmes pas oubliés, les uns et les autres nous passaient une
part de tout ce qu’ils mangeaient. Je commençai d’abord par goûter du
bout des lèvres, me méfiant beaucoup des sauces chinoises; mais je ne
tardai pas à sentir un petit fumet qui n’était pas désagréable.
L’accommodement était une sauce très-relevée, à la provençale; ce devait
être un de leurs mets de prédilection, car toutes les physionomies
avaient un air de contentement extrême, sans excepter mon compagnon, qui
avait une figure épanouie. Le tour du porc rôti vint ensuite; nous en
eûmes notre part, de même que du poisson et du riz; nous eûmes aussi du
thé et du vin dont j’ai déjà parlé. Les pirates nous paraissaient avoir
une bonhomie, une prévenance qui pouvaient nous faire croire un moment
que nous étions leurs hôtes, puisqu’ils semblaient oublier que nous
fussions leurs prisonniers. Ils demandaient à Than-Sing si j’étais
satisfaite de leur cuisine. Dois-je avouer que ces nouveautés
culinaires, après des privations plus qu’inouïes, ne m’étaient pas
désagréables? oui, sans doute, mais il fallait que j’eusse perdu à un
certain degré l’odorat essentiel, car ce qui constitue le fond de la
nourriture des Chinois ne venait nullement me troubler; et pourtant, ils
sont aussi sales que les sauvages sous ce rapport, s’ils ne le sont pas
plus. Ils mangent, dit-on, les chiens, les chats, les rats. Lorsqu’ils
tuent les volatiles, rien n’est perdu dans ces animaux, les intestins
sont lavés, raclés, essuyés, et passe sans conteste par le gosier des
Chinois. Enfin, ils absorbent jusqu’à des chenilles, des sauterelles,
des vers de terre, sans oublier les fameux nids d’hirondelles, dont la
réputation chez eux est proverbiale.

La circonstance aidant je faisais donc bonne contenance, comme je l’ai
déjà dit. Mais l’inquiétude devait bientôt succéder aux heures de repos
que nous venions de goûter. Les pirates, stimulés par leur chef,
s’étaient levés tout à coup avec un fort mouvement d’action; ce dernier,
en regardant dans sa longue-vue, venait d’apercevoir au loin une jonque
marchande, il la signalait à toute sa bande; les débris de notre dîner,
à peine achevé, disparurent en un clin d’œil et les pavillons furent
hissés au haut du grand mât en signe de ralliement.

Les pirates couraient çà et là, disposant tout pour une attaque. Il
s’agissait encore de pillage; mon compagnon et moi reprîmes notre rôle
passif; nous attendions, dans une anxiété silencieuse, des événements
nouveaux; mais Dieu ne permit pas que cette journée qui avait été si
heureuse pour nous s’achevât au milieu du _carnage_; ils s’aperçurent
que la jonque qu’ils poursuivaient, gagnant trop le large, ne pouvait
être atteinte, et ils se virent forcés de renoncer à leurs projets, ce
qui dissipa les angoisses que nous éprouvions.

Vers le soir, plusieurs jonques pirates s’étant approchées les unes des
autres, se touchèrent presque bord à bord, et, en bons voisins, les
chefs firent des échanges de marchandises; ils se cédèrent des
provisions de bouche. Ainsi, notre capitaine acheta, entre autres, des
canards tout vivants; s’apprêtait-il à nous bien traiter encore?

Quand la nuit fut venue, toutes les jonques se séparèrent, et la nôtre
continua seule sa route.

Peu après, la cérémonie de la prière commença à bord. Confiants dans les
bonnes dispositions qui nous avaient été manifestées, nous remontâmes
mon compagnon et moi, sur le pont. La brise était douce et molle, le
ciel d’une pureté splendide, reflétait ce qui constitue en mer
l’occupation du penseur, les étoiles. Je regardais d’un œil humide. Sous
cette voûte azurée je cherchais à découvrir l’ombre de la mienne, ou à
défaut le moindre signe favorable, le plus petit espoir. N’étais-je pas
abandonnée de la terre entière? Livrée à ces tristes pensées je
reportais les yeux autour de moi, c’est-à-dire que je rentrais dans la
réalité, et je remarquai que, contrairement aux jours précédents, on
avait mis toutes les voiles dehors, au lieu de jeter l’ancre à la tombée
de la nuit, comme on avait fait jusqu’alors. Vers dix heures j’allai
m’étendre sur mes planches et je pensai néanmoins à tout ce que nous
avions eu d’heureux dans ce jour qui venait de s’écouler, puis je tâchai
de fermer les yeux; mais plusieurs fois je m’éveillai, et je prêtai
l’oreille au moindre bruit. Le vent s’était élevé, et j’entendais au
sillage de l’eau, le long de la coque du navire, que nous filions
rapidement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Le lendemain devait être un jour marqué par la Providence; c’était le
18. Il pouvait être quatre heures du matin, lorsque mon compagnon et moi
nous fûmes tirés de notre sommeil par un bruit de voix et de pas
précipités. L’ancre avait été jetée, nous ne marchions plus; en outre,
on avait hermétiquement fermé notre panneau. Je cherchai à m’expliquer
la cause de l’activité qui régnait à une heure si matinale, et plus
j’écoutais, plus il me semblait qu’il se passait quelque chose
d’extraordinaire.

Après avoir tourmenté quelques instants mon esprit, j’essayai de me
rendormir, mais l’inquiétude était plus forte que le sommeil. Je me
tournai vers Than-Sing, il avait les yeux ouverts, je le priai alors de
me dire ce qui se passait sur le pont. Il se tenait l’oreille tendue; il
mit un doigt sur sa bouche comme pour me dire: silence! Je ne comprenais
pas très-bien. Comme je m’apprêtais à lui faire de nouvelles questions,
il me fit encore signe de me taire, en me disant bien bas: «Ils s’en
vont!» Puis il écoutait de nouveau.

Je ne comprenais absolument rien à ce que disait ce pauvre homme, quand
tout à coup il s’écria, avec un sentiment qui exprimait la joie et la
peur en même temps: «Ils s’en vont! vous dis-je, c’est un steamer!--Un
steamer?» répétai-je d’un air stupide. Je crus un moment que mon
compagnon devenait fou, et je le regardai, avec une véritable peur,
mais, me calmant aussitôt je me contentai de hausser les épaules avec
pitié. Je lui en voulais de réveiller en moi une espérance depuis
longtemps abandonnée, parce qu’elle me semblait irréalisable; aussi je
lui tournai le dos avec humeur. «Un steamer!» me disais-je en moi-même.
Mais, à peine avais-je eu le temps de faire quelques réflexions, qu’il
me toucha l’épaule, et qu’il me dit encore: «C’est un steamer! les
pirates ont vu un steamer, ils se sauvent dans la montagne!»

Je le regardai cette fois en face. Mes idées commençaient à
s’embrouiller. Il m’était impossible de donner un sens à tout ce que je
lui entendais dire. «Vous vous trompez, lui dis-je; si nos ennemis
étaient poursuivis, est-ce qu’ils perdraient leur temps à rester à
l’ancre?» Pour toute réponse, il colla son visage à la petite lucarne
près du gouvernail, et je l’entendis qui répétait: «Oui, oui, c’est un
steamer; regardez plutôt.» Cette fois, le cœur commença à me battre avec
violence; je m’approchai, à mon tour, de la lucarne, et je distinguai,
en effet, un navire qui pouvait se trouver à environ deux milles au
large. Je me sers du mot _navire_, parce que je ne lui voyais laisser
aucune trace de fumée derrière lui. Ma joie se calma même aussitôt, et
le doute me revint à l’esprit. Je me dis, alors, que c’était tout
simplement un navire voguant vers Hong-Kong, Canton ou Macao. «Qui pense
à venir nous secourir? me disais-je. Qui pourra nous découvrir à bord de
cette jonque, ressemblant à tant d’autres qui sillonnent ces parages?»
Cependant, quelques efforts que je fisse pour contraindre mon agitation,
je ne pouvais détacher mes yeux de la lucarne.

A ce moment, Than-Sing dit encore entre ses lèvres: «Ils s’en vont! ils
s’en vont!» Mais j’étais d’une incrédulité désespérante. Il est
difficile de revenir à la vie lorsqu’on a été si longtemps à l’agonie.
«Et pourquoi s’en iraient-ils? lui disais-je.--A cause du steamer, me
répondait-il.--Mais je vous dis que cela n’en est pas un.--Si, je vous
assure que je ne vous trompe pas.--D’abord, il n’y a pas de fumée; vous
voyez bien que c’est un navire.--Cela ne fait rien; les pirates s’en
vont. Écoutez.» Le silence se faisait en effet autour de nous, car l’on
n’entendait plus que par intervalle un murmure de voix qui allait
toujours s’éloignant. Pourtant, les pas d’un homme se faisaient encore
entendre. J’élevai les bras en l’air pour soulever le panneau; je
voulais voir; mais Than-Sing me retint, jugeant plus prudent, en cette
circonstance, de nous faire oublier. Au même instant, le panneau fut
ouvert avec précipitation, et une figure aux traits bouleversés apparut
à nos yeux. C’était le cuisinier du bord, que l’alerte répandue parmi
l’équipage forçait d’abandonner ses utiles fonctions. Il parla en
gesticulant, et avec une volubilité de paroles que l’émotion
entrecoupait. Il disait à Than-Sing (je l’ai su depuis): «N’ayez pas
peur... vous allez être sauvés... c’est un steamer...» Il était resté le
dernier; mais le sentiment de la conservation l’emporta sur le désir
qu’il pouvait éprouver de converser plus longtemps avec nous, il
s’enfuit au plus vite pour rejoindre les autres. Je poussai alors une
exclamation de joie impossible à rendre; plus prompte que la pensée, je
m’élançai sur le pont. Il était bien vrai, nous étions seuls sur la
jonque, laquelle se trouvait engravée dans le sable. Le but des pirates,
en s’arrêtant en cet endroit, avait été de faire une provision d’eau
douce, lorsqu’aux premières lueurs du jour, un steamer, masqué jusque-là
par une pointe de terre, leur apparut. Ce steamer avait jeté l’ancre et
déjà il envoyait des embarcations pour reconnaître la côte. C’est alors
qu’effrayés du danger qui les menaçait, et ne pouvant démarrer, les
pirates avaient préféré fuir en abandonnant leur jonque. Ils avaient
gagné la terre en entrant dans l’eau jusqu’à mi-jambes; nous les
apercevions encore très-distinctement grimper en toute hâte le long du
versant de la montagne. Ils traînaient avec eux ce qu’ils avaient pu
emporter de leurs rapines; les uns étaient chargés à dos, les autres
portaient des fardeaux sur la tête ou sur les bras.

J’étais dans un saisissement qui ne peut se dépeindre. En les voyant
ainsi disparaître, mes yeux se tournaient alternativement vers nos
ennemis qui fuyaient et vers le steamer qui nous apportait sans doute la
délivrance. Je joignais les mains en les serrant avec ivresse, mon cœur
se dilatait, je jetais dans l’air des exclamations bruyantes, je
prononçais des paroles incohérentes; enfin, je regardais dans la
montagne, je regardais le steamer; j’aurais voulu, comme dans un conte
de fées, m’y trouver transportée. Cependant, aucune embarcation ne se
détachait pour venir à notre rencontre; mes pieds ne tenaient plus en
place. Je jetai la vue vers la pointe de terre près de laquelle le
steamer semblait rapproché, et je dis à Than-Sing: «Allons là-bas, ils
nous apercevront peut-être; il n’y a qu’un peu d’eau à traverser, nous
ferons comme les pirates; venez! venez!» Je ne voyais que la distance,
je ne mesurais pas la difficulté. Mais Than-Sing me répondit: «Non,
c’est inutile, ils vont venir.--Ils vont venir!» disais-je. Puis
j’attendis une minute, et, cette minute passée, je répétais les paroles
que j’avais dites un instant avant, et Than-Sing me répondait avec son
flegme habituel: «Ils vont venir, calmez-vous, ils vont venir.» Ce
sang-froid m’exaspérait; je ne comprenais pas qu’il nous fît perdre un
temps précieux, en n’allant pas au-devant du secours que le ciel nous
envoyait. Je tentai une dernière fois de le persuader. «Écoutez, lui
dis-je, prenons le petit canot; il me semble qu’avant une heure d’ici,
nous pourrions aborder le steamer. Songez donc, si les pirates allaient
revenir nous faire prisonniers, ce serait la mort cette fois! Venez.
Voulez-vous? Je vous en supplie!» Et je regardais le steamer avec
avidité.--«Non, me répondait-il toujours avec le même calme, c’est un
steamer; attendons; je vous dis qu’ils vont venir.» J’étais désespérée;
c’était la première fois qu’il s’élevait un débat entre nous deux. Si
j’avais su nager, je crois que j’aurais eu le courage de me jeter à la
mer pour tenter de me sauver. Je regardais le petit canot avec envie.
Mon salut ne me paraissait véritablement assuré que lorsque je ne
foulerais plus ce plancher de malheur. Je me dirigeai vers l’arrière de
la jonque, où il était amarré, et je l’examinai comme mon unique
ressource; je ne tremblais pas à l’idée de me voir seule au milieu des
flots, je me demandais simplement si je serais assez forte pour le
conduire; je me sentais le courage du désespoir, surtout lorsque je
portais mes regards vers la montagne, sur le versant de laquelle
quelques pirates apparaissaient encore.

Tout à coup, Than-Sing me saisit le bras en m’arrêtant dans ma pantomime
désespérée: «Tenez, regardez, regardez là-bas! me dit-il; voyez-vous
trois canots?» Je tournai les yeux dans la direction qu’il m’indiquait,
et je vis, en effet, trois canots, lesquels après avoir fait un circuit,
semblaient se diriger vers nous. Je suivais avec anxiété leur marche
progressive, une idée subite me vint. Je me dépouillai de mon premier
vêtement, et je l’attachai en toute hâte au bout d’un long bambou pour
attirer l’attention de l’équipage du steamer. Je me disais au milieu de
mes transports de joie: «Nos yeux nous trompent peut-être: ces canots
qui paraissent venir à nous ne peuvent-ils pas tout à coup changer de
route?» Alors, courant à l’arrière de la jonque, qui était le point le
plus en vue, je me mis à agiter avec frénésie mon signal improvisé, puis
je le fixai bien vite entre deux planches. Quelle émotion! mon cœur
battait avec tant de violence, qu’en quelques instants j’avais épuisé
mes forces. Il n’y avait plus à en douter, on venait pour nous sauver.
Notre jonque était la seule qui existât sur le rivage; quelques minutes
encore et nous allions pouvoir distinguer la forme et la couleur des
vêtements de ceux qui montaient les embarcations. Than-Sing, qui se
tenait tout près de moi, croisait ses mains en signe de prière; sa bonne
figure exprimait la joie la plus vive. Une idée me vint à l’esprit:
c’est que la vue de son habillement chinois pouvait être d’un mauvais
effet et nous compromettre; je le priai de se dissimuler le plus
possible; il comprit ma pensée, car sans mot dire il se retira à
l’écart. Mes yeux, perçant la distance, commencèrent, quoique
faiblement, à apercevoir les mouvements des rameurs, mais il se fit un
temps d’arrêt dans la marche des canots; les rames, d’une seule
manœuvre, furent relevées debout; une crainte se glissa dans mon âme:
allaient-ils virer de bord et retourner au steamer? Je portai mes mains
à la hauteur de mes yeux pour abriter ma vue qui était gênée par le
soleil, quand une des plus effroyables détonations retentit, en même
temps qu’une fumée blanche et épaisse enveloppait, comme dans un nuage,
les trois embarcations. A cette attaque inattendue, surprise,
épouvantée, mes jambes fléchirent sous moi, et je tombai sur mes
genoux, en criant, dans un paroxysme violent de frayeur: «Than-Sing! ils
viennent pour nous tuer! Nous allons mourir!!!» Mais à peine avais-je
proféré ces cris de désespoir, qu’une rage subite plus forte que la
douleur s’empara de moi. En moins de temps qu’il ne faut pour l’écrire,
je m’étais dit: «Puisque mon malheur est à son comble, puisque je suis
abandonnée de Dieu, puisqu’il faut que je meure, eh bien! je veux qu’ils
me voient, qu’ils me tuent bien en face!» C’en était trop, je m’élançai
à la même place où j’étais quelques moments auparavant. Mes yeux étaient
secs et ardents; de la main droite, je saisis ma casquette et je
l’agitai en l’air avec frénésie. Oh! alors, surprise! surprise inouïe!
Au lieu d’un nouveau feu, des hourras formidables et prolongés
parviennent à mes oreilles. Ce cri, partant des canots est répété par
trois fois différentes, ce n’était pas un rêve cette fois, il me révéla
que nos sauveurs étaient des Anglais; tous les hommes d’équipage se
découvraient et agitaient leurs chapeaux en signe de salut; j’étais
reconnue, j’étais sauvée!




CHAPITRE VIII

     Récit du capitaine Rooney.--Expédition sur la côte.--Villages
     incendiés.--La mère des pirates.--Mort d’un Chinois.--_The lady
     Mary Wood._--Retour à Hong-Kong.--Protection du consul.--Visite de
     Than-Sing.--Adieux du capitaine Rooney.


Comment peindre ce que j’éprouvai alors! mon âme succombait sous l’excès
de ce bonheur inattendu; et sans parole, presque sans pensée, je sentais
des larmes baigner mon visage. En ce moment, les canots abordaient,
c’étaient les soldats de la marine anglaise. Les officiers, le capitaine
Rooney en tête s’élancèrent aussitôt vers moi avec des marques du plus
vif intérêt. Ayant aperçu Than-Sing qui se tenait à mes côtés, plusieurs
marins lui montrèrent le poing, le prenant pour un pirate oublié par les
siens; mais j’étendis la main, de peur qu’on ne fît un mauvais parti à
mon compagnon d’infortune, et le capitaine Rooney se hâta d’expliquer
aux officiers quel était le marchand chinois, et combien sa conduite
était digne d’éloges.

Lorsqu’on vit que je n’étais pas trop faible pour me mettre en route,
l’on me fit descendre dans l’une des chaloupes pour nous conduire au
steamer. Je m’éloignai donc à tout jamais de la jonque, où je serais
morte peut-être quelques jours plus tard, si le ciel n’eût mis une fin
si heureuse et si brusque à mes épreuves, et ne m’eût témoigné son
ineffable miséricorde en m’envoyant un secours inespéré. Pendant ce
trajet, les officiers, qui parlaient français, m’expliquèrent pourquoi
j’avais douté si longtemps de la présence du steamer; ils avaient
abaissé la cheminée afin de pouvoir mieux surprendre les pirates. Ils me
félicitèrent de ce que j’avais eu le courage, après avoir essuyé un coup
de feu de leur part, de m’être mise encore en évidence pour me faire
reconnaître, ajoutant que c’était grâce à ma chevelure blonde, qu’ils
m’avaient reconnue. Jusqu’alors, ils m’avaient prise pour un Chinois
qui donnait l’alarme aux autres. Enfin, mes sauveurs témoignaient une
joie bien vive du succès qu’ils venaient de remporter. J’appris qu’à
Hong Kong on me croyait morte, ou, pour le moins, emmenée dans
l’intérieur de l’empire pour y être vendue. Eux-mêmes, me disaient-ils,
n’avaient pas l’espoir de me retrouver.

Nous étions à moitié de la distance qui nous séparait du steamer et de
la jonque, que cette dernière était déjà la proie des flammes. Peu
après, nous abordions. Les soldats poussaient de longs hourras, auxquels
les marins répondaient avec non moins de chaleur. Bien que je fusse
très-émue des marques de sympathie dont j’étais l’objet, j’étais presque
honteuse en me voyant dans un état si misérable, et ce fut en baissant
la tête que je traversai un rang de personnes notables de Hong-Kong,
venues à bord pour voir de plus près les résultats de l’expédition. Mais
je pus bientôt me dérober à tous les yeux, en me retirant dans une
cabine qu’on avait disposée à mon intention. Une fois seule, je me hâtai
de faire disparaître les souillures de ma captivité en mettant des
vêtements préparés pour moi. Je me regardai dans un miroir; c’est à
peine si je pouvais me reconnaître, tant mes traits étaient changés et
maigris. Un cercle bleuâtre cernait mes yeux, ma peau était noircie par
le hâle de la mer. Je dus renoncer pour le moment à réparer complétement
le désordre de ma chevelure, qui demandait un soin tout particulier.
Pendant ce temps, les trois embarcations qui avaient effectué ma
délivrance repartaient de nouveau pour aller incendier deux ou trois
villages sur la côte, villages connus pour servir de repaires aux
pirates.

Les détails qui vont suivre sont racontés par le capitaine Rooney
lui-même; c’est le récit exact qu’il fit aux autorités anglaises et au
vice-consul de France, après la catastrophe. J’ai pensé qu’en le
reproduisant fidèlement, comme l’ont fait les journalistes de Hong-Kong
dans leurs feuilles, il retracerait mieux que je ne pourrais le faire la
marche des deux expéditions dirigées à ma recherche et à celle du
_Caldera_.

Laissons donc parler M. Rooney:


_Extrait de l’_OVERLAND CHINA MAIL, _de Hong-Kong_.

Nous avons parlé d’un navire qui s’était perdu sur la côte occidentale.
On a su depuis que ce navire était chilien et s’appelait _Caldera_. Le
récit suivant de sa capture par les pirates chinois a été fourni par le
capitaine Rooney:

     «Le jeudi 5, à cinq heures du matin, _le Caldera_ quitta Hong-Kong
     pour se rendre à San-Francisco avec un équipage de dix-sept hommes
     et trois passagers, une dame française et deux Chinois. A quatre
     heures, le baromètre baissant et le temps prenant un aspect
     menaçant, je diminuai la voilure et me préparai à subir une forte
     brise. A minuit, il ventait violemment, et le =6=, avant le point du
     jour, nous courions sous la grande voile de hune à moitié carguée
     au milieu des lames qui nous battaient en travers. Pendant toute la
     journée, le vent continua à souffler avec violence; notre grand mât
     de hune et notre mât d’artimon furent brisés au ras du pont et le
     navire commença à faire eau en abondance. Cet état de choses
     continua jusqu’au samedi à quatre heures de l’après-midi. En ce
     moment, la terre se montra à deux milles vers le nord; le vent
     soufflait sud-sud-ouest. Je pensai que le meilleur parti à prendre
     était de me réfugier au plus vite dans une baie que je voyais sous
     le vent, de réparer là mes avaries et d’y laisser reposer mon
     équipage épuisé de fatigue. Je réussis à atteindre cette baie et
     j’y jetai l’ancre à environ six heures de l’après-midi; les hommes
     se mirent aussitôt aux pompes. Ils y étaient encore à dix heures du
     soir, lorsque trois jonques chinoises vinrent accoster _le
     Caldera_, jetèrent sur le pont leurs pots à feu, montèrent des deux
     côtés à l’abordage et firent prisonniers tous les hommes qui
     étaient sur le pont; puis ils s’emparèrent de moi et de ceux qui
     étaient dans leur lit, nous lièrent les mains derrière le dos et
     demandèrent si le navire était anglais. Sur notre réponse négative,
     ils nous dirent que c’était heureux pour nous, car, si le navire
     avait été anglais, ils nous auraient tous massacrés. Le 7, au point
     du jour, ils nous forcèrent de lever l’ancre et de les suivre dans
     une autre baie où nous mouillâmes par une profondeur de trois
     brasses. Là, ils se mirent à piller la cargaison du navire. Mais,
     dans la matinée du 9, une flotte nombreuse de jonques parut en vue,
     et les trois jonques qui nous avaient capturés s’éloignèrent. Cette
     flotte n’en comptait pas moins de trente-cinq. Elles s’emparèrent
     de tout ce qu’elles trouvèrent à leur convenance et furent bientôt
     remplacées par quelques autres jonques de moindre grandeur, que
     d’autres suivirent encore jusqu’à ce qu’il n’y eut plus rien à
     prendre dans le navire; alors les dernières arrivées se mirent,
     faute de mieux, à enlever le cuivre. Une de celles-ci, le mercredi
     suivant, s’empara de la dame française et d’un des deux Chinois
     passagers à bord du _Caldera_. Dans l’après-midi de ce même jour,
     j’obtins d’un des bateaux pirates qu’il me prît à son bord avec mon
     charpentier et qu’il nous conduisît à Macao. J’y arrivai le
     lendemain jeudi, et je fis connaître ma situation au capitaine du
     port et au gouverneur; mais il me dirent que je ne pourrais trouver
     aucune assistance dans ce port. Cela me détermina à partir
     immédiatement pour Hong-Kong, où j’arrivai à minuit, vendredi
     dernier.»

Aussitôt que le capitaine Rooney fut arrivé, il se rendit en toute hâte
chez ses agents, MM. Williams, Anthon et Cᵉ, et chez M. Haskell, un des
associés, et qui remplissait, à Hong-Kong, les fonctions de vice-consul
de France. M. Haskell se transporta immédiatement à bord du vaisseau de
S. M. B. _le Spartan_, et, après une entrevue avec sir William Hoste,
qui lui promit l’assistance d’un détachement de ses hommes, il alla
réveiller M. Walker, de la _Peninsular and Oriental Company_, qui frêta
_la Lady-Mary-Wood_ pour aller à la recherche du _Caldera_. M. Rooney se
rendit aussi chez le lieutenant-gouverneur, qui donna ordre à M.
Caldwell, interprète, d’accompagner l’expédition et de prendre sous sa
garde comme prisonniers les deux Chinois qui avaient amené le capitaine
Rooney à Macao et l’avaient de là accompagné à Hong-Kong, pour y
recevoir 50 livres sterling de récompense qu’il leur avait promises.

En conséquence, le lundi suivant, à 9 heures 30 minutes du matin, _la
Lady-Mary-Wood_ appareilla, ayant pris à bord quatre-vingts blue-jacket
(soldats de marine), sous le commandement du lieutenant Palisser et de
MM. Olivier et Rogers; elle quitta le port à la hauteur de la pointe
sud-ouest de Lantao (ty-ya-san); une jonque de la côte occidentale fut
aperçue voguant vers _la Lady-Mary-Wood_. Quand elle l’eut rejoint, on
vit qu’elle avait à bord le subrecargue et l’équipage du _Caldera_.
Cette jonque avait fait prix avec ces dernier de 400 livres sterling.
Les matelots furent pris à bord de la _Lady-Mary-Wood_, et la jonque
continua sa route sur Hong-Kong, avec une lettre de M. Caldwell.

Les faits qui suivirent ont été racontés en ces termes par un témoin
oculaire:

     «_La Lady-Mary-Wood_ vint le soir jeter l’ancre dans un mouillage
     où nous ne remarquâmes rien autre chose que l’absence totale de
     toute voile le long de la côte. Pas une seule, ni petite ni grande
     ne s’était laissé voir depuis que nous avions quitté le voisinage
     de Macao jusqu’au moment où nous entrâmes à Koo-Lan. Comme la nuit
     arrivait, on ne put rien entreprendre ce soir-là, d’autant plus que
     le capitaine Rooney n’avait pas une idée très-exacte de l’endroit
     où il avait laissé son navire. En attendant, les embarcations
     furent mises en état: c’étaient la chaloupe du _Spartan_, dans
     laquelle il y avait un canon de six, et trois canots du steamer. A
     peine le jour levé, des débris des mâts du _Caldera_ se montrèrent
     flottant sur les vagues à environ deux milles du steamer. Ils
     étaient tout noirs, d’où l’on pouvait conclure que le navire avait
     été incendié, en vue de s’emparer du cuivre et du fer employés dans
     sa construction. A neuf heures du matin environ, les quatre
     embarcations prirent le large escortées par soixante-dix hommes,
     et, après une longue traversée, elles abordèrent dans le voisinage
     de quelques huttes de pêcheurs dont les habitants gagnèrent
     aussitôt les montagnes. On se mit à leur poursuite, et ce ne fut
     pas sans peine qu’on parvint à en saisir un. Il fut amené à M.
     Caldwell qui, toutefois, ne put en tirer aucun renseignement, si ce
     n’est que le navire «avait été brûlé depuis plus d’un mois.» On lui
     permit de s’en retourner, et la chaloupe, accompagnée de deux
     embarcations, se dirigea vers le village de Choo-Koo-Mee, distant
     d’environ huit milles du steamer. La chaloupe marchait à un mille à
     peu près en avant de la seconde embarcation; elle fut rejointe par
     la troisième; la quatrième, sous le commandement de M. Rogers, fut
     laissée en arrière par mesure de précaution.

»Près d’aborder, M. Caldwell envoya à terre l’un des deux
     prisonniers dûment accompagné, avec mission de bien faire
     comprendre aux habitants qu’on venait dans un but tout pacifique,
     et simplement pour s’enquérir de la dame qui avait été emmenée par
     les pirates. Le prisonnier avait fait à peine quelques pas qu’un
     boulet de quatre atteignit l’embarcation montée par M. Caldwell,
     dans la direction de sa personne; mais c’était un boulet mort, et
     il n’en résulta aucun mal. Le lieutenant Palisser considérant comme
     un risque inutile de passer sous le feu des Chinois, les
     embarcations se mirent hors de portée, mouvement que l’ennemi prit
     pour une retraite, car il poussa aussitôt des cris de triomphe,
     agita ses drapeaux en signe de défi. Nos hommes, conduits par M.
     Olivier, eurent bientôt pris terre; ils poursuivirent les Chinois
     de buissons en buissons et les chassèrent du village en leur tuant
     de neuf à douze des leurs. En explorant les maisons, on eut
     l’explication de leur résistance. On y trouva en grand nombre des
     boîtes de thé, des balles de riz, etc., etc., qui avaient fait
     partie de la cargaison du _Caldera_. Cela fait, les embarcations
     vinrent rejoindre le steamer rapportant quelques-uns des canons
     (pièces de quatre de fabrique anglaise) pris aux Chinois.

»_La Lady-Mary-Wood_ retourna à Hong-Kong, le lundi, sans avoir
     accompli le principal objet de sa mission, c’est-à-dire la
     délivrance de Mme FANNY LOVIOT, emmenée par les pirates; mais M.
     Caldwell, nous assure-t-on, pense qu’elle ne peut être que dans le
     voisinage de cette colonie, ou, dans tous les cas, de ce côté de
     Macao, et il espère avoir bientôt sur elle des renseignements qui
     lui permettront d’opérer sa délivrance.

»Cependant, une seconde expédition a été chargée de compléter
     l’œuvre de _la Lady-Mary-Wood_. Le steamer _Ann_ a quitté le port
     mardi matin, avec quatre-vingt-dix hommes du _Spartan_, sous le
     commandement des lieutenants Palisser, Morell et Stokes,
     accompagnés du chirurgien Bradsaw, qui avait aussi fait partie de
     l’expédition de _la Lady-Mary-Wood_. Il y a tout lieu de croire que
     cette nouvelle expédition retrouvera une grande partie du
     chargement du _Caldera_, et rendra bon compte de tous les villages
     de pirates qui existent dans l’île.

»Nous avons dit que le steamer _Ann_ avait été frété pour une
     seconde expédition sur la côte occidentale, dans le but de
     compléter la destruction des villages des pirates et d’y reprendre
     tout ce qui pourrait s’y trouver de la cargaison du _Caldera_. Il
     revint au port le vendredi en faisant le signal _tout va bien_, et
     l’on apprit bientôt, en effet, que le steamer avait non seulement
     réussi dans le but mentionné plus haut, mais encore qu’il avait eu
     la bonne fortune de capturer la jonque dans laquelle Mme FANNY
     LOVIOT et le marchand chinois, faits prisonniers par les pirates,
     se trouvaient confinés. Voici les détails de cette capture, tels
     qu’ils nous ont été racontés:

»_L’Ann_, comme _la Lady-Mary-Wood_, arriva à une heure trop
     avancée de la soirée pour rien entreprendre ce jour-là. En
     conséquence, le lieutenant Palisser et sa troupe attendirent en
     repos jusqu’au lendemain matin. Mais, dès avant le lever du jour,
     les hommes s’installèrent dans les embarcations (la barge, la
     pinasse et le petit canot du _Spartan_) et se dirigèrent vers une
     jonque qui gagnait le rivage; l’équipage de cette dernière, se
     voyant poursuivi, s’enfuit en toute hâte vers la montagne; quand
     les embarcations, qui avaient continué d’avancer, furent dans son
     voisinage, elles tirèrent sur ladite jonque un coup de canon dont
     le bruit fit monter sur le pont la prisonnière française et le
     marchand chinois, qui furent ainsi miraculeusement délivrés. On sut
     depuis que la jonque était entrée le matin dans la baie pour y
     faire de l’eau. Deux autres jonques, chargées de volailles et
     autres produits, reçurent la chasse et vinrent aussi s’échouer sur
     le rivage. Abandonnées par leurs équipages, elles furent incendiées
     et détruites par les nôtres.

»L’expédition se dirigea ensuite vers le village de Choo-Koo-Mee,
     d’où les Chinois, à la première occasion, firent feu sur nos
     embarcations, qui, à leur tour, lancèrent quelques boulets parmi
     les maisons ruinées et les arbres, pour disperser les habitants qui
     pourraient avoir la témérité de résister; puis nos hommes
     débarquèrent. Un coup de canon lancé par les Chinois amena sur ce
     même point un certain nombre de matelots et de soldats de marine
     avec le lieutenant Palisser, et, tous ensemble, conduits par M.
     Sarrat, s’élancèrent par un étroit sentier vers le village. Une
     pluie de flèches et de pierres, et la décharge de neuf canons
     chargés de vieux boulets de fer, de pierres, etc., etc., les
     accueillit, mais ne leur fit aucun mal. Naturellement, on se
     précipita aussitôt sur les canons, dont on s’empara; quelques
     habitants furent tués à coups de fusil et de baïonnette; nos
     hommes, après avoir mis en sûreté une centaine de ballots de sucre
     et de thé appartenant au _Caldera_, détruisirent encore dans les
     environs un petit nombre de huttes qu’ils trouvèrent, puis ils
     mirent le feu au village, après quoi ils se rembarquèrent et
     regagnèrent le steamer.

»Le lendemain mardi, dans la matinée, les embarcations furent
     dirigées vers le village de Koo-Lan, qu’elles trouvèrent défendu
     par un fort solidement établi, armé de canons de 24 et de 32, dont
     plusieurs coups, habilement pointés, saluèrent leur approche, en
     même temps qu’une flotte de pirates, comptant vingt grande jonques,
     venait prendre position le long de la grève. Nos hommes ne
     demandaient qu’à les attaquer; mais le lieutenant Palisser, en
     présence d’une force si considérable, ne jugea pas prudent de le
     faire avec les quatre-vingt-dix hommes qu’il avait sous ses ordres,
     d’autant plus que le principal but de l’expédition avait déjà été
     atteint par cette poignée de braves, et l’_Ann_ appareilla pour
     revenir à Hong-Kong. On eut bientôt lieu de se féliciter de cette
     sage détermination, car on a su depuis que, le lendemain matin, la
     première flotte de pirates de vingt jonques, dont nous venons de
     parler, avait été grossie par une seconde de quarante. Contre ces
     soixante jonques, la lutte eût été trop inégale, et, si l’_Ann_
     l’eût engagée, il est fort possible qu’elle n’en fût pas sortie à
     son avantage.»

             _Extrait de l’_OVERLAND FRIENDS, _of China_.

     «Nous avons promis, dans le dernier numéro, de plus amples détails
     sur l’expédition entreprise par le navire _Ann_, à la recherche des
     deux passagers enlevés du _Caldera_ par les pirates, Mme FANNY
     LOVIOT et le marchand chinois. Nous regrettons de ne pouvoir donner
     de cette expédition un récit aussi ample que nos lecteurs auraient
     pu le désirer, surtout en ce qui concerne le traitement que les
     pirates ont fait subir à leurs deux prisonniers, traitement dont
     nous avons entendu parler comme d’une chose inouïe, et devant
     lequel nous nous arrêtons avec douleur, en pensant à la pauvre
     jeune femme qui en fut l’objet. On nous a affirmé que les barbares
     avaient jeté leur captive, dans une cabine peuplée de rats,
     d’araignées, de cancrolats, enfin d’insectes les plus immondes.
     Tout cela n’est-il pas fait pour exciter la curiosité et le plus
     vif intérêt?»

                                                   (_Friend of China._)

Je dois dire ici qu’après cette catastrophe, je me trouvais dans un tel
état de fièvre et de malaise moral, qu’il ne m’a pas été possible de
satisfaire la curiosité bien légitime des journalistes de Hong-Kong en
ce qui touche les souffrances de ma captivité. C’est en France seulement
que, rappelant mes souvenirs, je me mis à écrire cette relation,
laquelle par son étrangeté même m’a paru mériter la publicité.

En terminant les détails de cette expédition, je ne veux pas oublier de
citer un trait de représailles des plus caractéristique.

Il avait été fait dans cette récente affaire deux prisonniers.
J’entendais les matelots raconter les différents épisodes du combat.
Tous les détails qu’ils donnaient sur la sanglante journée faisaient
peine à entendre; ils énuméraient le nombre d’ennemis égorgés; l’un
d’eux même, qui se vantait beaucoup de son intrépidité, s’attira, plus
peut-être par jalousie que par commisération pour le sort des victimes,
mainte observation sur sa cruauté. Comme on lui reprochait d’avoir tué
une femme chinoise avec le plus grand sang-froid, il répondit
impatienté: «Êtes-vous tous des imbéciles, vous n’avez donc pas vu que
c’était la mère des pirates!»

Mon retour à Hong-Kong causa une grande rumeur lorsque la nouvelle s’en
répandit. La foule accourut et se pressa sur les quais; en un instant,
des canots remplis de monde accoururent vers le steamer,
l’environnèrent, et tous les regards cherchaient à me découvrir parmi
les passagers. Il n’était guère facile de me reconnaître sous le costume
d’homme dont j’étais encore vêtue. Chacun me faisait des offres
généreuses. M. Walker, directeur de _the Peninsular and oriental
Company_, me pressait d’accepter l’hospitalité dans sa famille, près de
sa femme, qui compatissait à mes malheurs et avait le plus grand désir
de me connaître. J’étais très-touchée de toutes ces marques de
sympathie; mais je remerciai M. Walker en lui disant que mon plus vif
désir, avant de songer à moi-même, était de voir le vice-consul; j’avais
trouvé une protection si pleine d’humanité dans ce représentant de la
France, que j’eusse regardé comme une ingratitude d’accepter aucun
bienfait, sans qu’il fût le premier à me donner son approbation: ne lui
devais-je pas plus que la vie? Comme je me disposais à me rendre au
consulat, je fus prévenue par M. Haskell, qui se rendait sur le steamer;
il vint à ma rencontre. Il était très-ému; on lisait sur son visage
rayonnant la joie qu’il éprouvait en ce moment de voir tous ses efforts
couronnés d’un si grand succès. Il me dit ces simples paroles: «Venez,
je vous offre abri et protection au consulat de France.» Ce mot _France_
fit vibrer en moi un sentiment indéfinissable; il réveilla le souvenir
de tout ce qui m’était cher; il était l’expression de la sollicitude de
ma patrie veillant sans relâche sur le sort de ses enfants, en quelque
endroit éloigné du globe qu’ils se trouvassent égarés. Ma réponse fut
des larmes; il ne m’était pas possible de proférer une parole, tant mon
émotion était grande. La Providence, dans mon malheur, se montrait si
miséricordieuse!

Nous descendîmes dans une embarcation qui nous transporta à terre; là,
une chaise à porteurs m’attendait, et je parvins en peu d’instants à la
résidence française.

Je passai vingt et un jour à Hong-Kong, comblée d’attentions les plus
délicates. Plusieurs personnes de la ville vinrent me visiter, beaucoup
de dames surtout, dont le récit de mes malheurs avait excité la
sensibilité. Je dus pourtant me renfermer, par ordonnance du médecin; à
la suite de tant d’émotions contraires, ma constitution se trouva
complétement ébranlée. Cette joie, qui succédait à une immense douleur,
m’accablait avec trop de violence pour que mes facultés pussent résister
longtemps à la secousse. Le mal se déclara, et je fus prise d’une fièvre
ardente. Je restai plusieurs jours et plusieurs nuits en proie à un
horrible délire; mon cerveau malade me transportait sans cesse dans les
régions de piraterie, où je ne voyais que sang, poignards et incendie;
enfin, la nature reprit le dessus, Dieu aidant, et je me rétablis vite.
Des lettres de France, apportées par un navire arrivé de Californie, me
furent remises pendant ma convalescence, et opérèrent la guérison du
corps en même temps que celle de l’âme; ces lettres me rappelaient avec
instance, et j’avais été trop éprouvée dans mes voyages pour que mon
plus grand désir ne fût pas de revoir, le plus tôt possible, ma patrie
et tous ceux qui souhaitaient mon retour.

Je dus alors songer à remplacer par de nouveaux effets ceux que j’avais
perdus. Je fis mes commandes de robes et autres vêtements de femme; dans
le courant de mon récit, j’ai oublié de dire que, dans ce pays bizarre,
ce sont des hommes qui confectionnent les habillements des deux sexes:
la profession de couturière n’est pas, comme en Europe, l’attribution
exclusive des femmes. Tous les effets que je rapportai de Chine, tels
que robes, linge de corps, chaussures, furent faits par les mains
d’ouvriers chinois.

A quelques jours de là, M. Haskell vint m’annoncer la visite de
Than-Sing, mon compagnon d’infortune; ce digne homme avait tenu à me
faire ses adieux avant de partir pour Canton, où il comptait retrouver
sa femme et ses enfants. Il entra, et j’eus quelque peine à le
reconnaître, tant il était richement vêtu: tous ses habits lui avaient
été prêtés par un ami; car, ainsi que moi, il avait été complétement
dévalisé. Il avait les larmes aux yeux en s’informant de ma santé. Après
une heure de causerie, pendant laquelle nous parlâmes de notre temps de
misère, il se retira et me fit ses adieux, non sans m’avoir priée
d’accepter, en souvenir de nos malheurs, un joli fichu brodé de soie de
diverses couleurs et d’un travail très-précieux.

Mon départ était fixé pour le 11 novembre; je devais partir par un
steamer de la malle des Indes; le gouvernement français payait mon
voyage jusqu’à Marseille.

La veille de mon embarquement, je reçus deux visiteurs, que je ne puis
oublier de citer: c’étaient le capitaine Rooney et un des lieutenants
qui avaient fait partie de l’expédition envoyée à ma recherche. Cet
officier, après m’avoir exprimé toute la joie qu’il ressentait d’avoir
participé à ma délivrance, me présenta un livre écrit en langue
allemande, que je reconnus pour être celui dans lequel j’avais tracé, à
l’aide d’une épingle, quelques lignes en français et en anglais. Ce
livre lui était tombé sous les yeux lors de la perquisition faite dans
la jonque où j’étais retenue prisonnière; il s’en était emparé,
lorsqu’en retournant les premiers feuillets, il avait pu lire avec
surprise le peu de mots que j’y avais tracés. Il me demanda mon
consentement pour en rester possesseur; il voulait, disait-il, le garder
comme une relique, afin de le montrer dans sa famille, à son retour en
Angleterre. J’étais trop heureuse d’accorder cette légère satisfaction à
une personne qui avait contribué à me sauver la vie.

Quant au capitaine Rooney, il semblait fort triste, malgré l’heureuse
issue qui avait mis fin à nos infortunes; il paraissait accablé par ce
qu’il appelait la fatalité. Son séjour en Chine ne devait pas être de
longue durée; il sentait aussi le besoin de revoir sa patrie. Il me dit
pour dernier adieu: «Si mes vœux sont exaucés, vous arriverez à bon
port; parlez avec confiance, la Providence est avec vous.»




CHAPITRE IX

     Départ de Chine.--_Le Malta._--Singapore.--Penang.--L’île de
     Ceylan.--_Le Bentinck._--Aden.--Dans la mer Rouge.--Isthme de
     Suez.--Le Caire.--Le Nil.--Les
     Pyramides.--Boulac.--Alexandrie.--_Le
     Valetta._--Malte.--Marseille.--J’ai fait le tour du monde.


Le 11 novembre 1854, je me rendis à bord du steamer _le Malta_. Le
vice-consul m’accompagnait, m’assurant ainsi sa généreuse protection
jusqu’à mes derniers pas dans ce pays; je ne pus le quitter sans
éprouver une émotion bien vive, et si jamais ce récit lui parvient, je
désire qu’il puisse y lire l’expression vraie de la reconnaissance que
je lui ai vouée.

La ligne que suit la malle des Indes pour se rendre en Europe est
certainement la plus enviée des voyageurs. On se rend de Hong-Kong à
Singapore: en sept jours. Le steamer stationne vingt-quatre heures pour
prendre du charbon, ce qui permet aux passagers de descendre à terre et
de visiter la ville, qui, outre les Malais, est en grande partie habitée
par des Chinois et un petit nombre de négociants anglais.

De Singapore on va à Penang; il faut trois jours; le steamer s’arrête
une demi-journée seulement pour prendre les lettres, mais ce temps
suffit pour visiter ce délicieux coin de terre, où la végétation est si
active et où les fruits les plus beaux sont en grande abondance.

Après huit jours de navigation on touche à Galle, île de Ceylan. Là tous
les passagers descendent à terre; les bagages sont transbordés sur un
autre steamer. Le nombre des voyageurs n’est jamais considérable dans
cette partie du continent; nous étions trente-deux, en partie tous
Anglais, et six ou huit Espagnols qui venaient des îles Philippines.

_Le Malta_ continuant sa route sur Bombay, nous nous rembarquâmes, après
deux jours de relâche et par conséquent de promenades, sur _le Bentink_,
autre steamer de la Compagnie des Indes, qui devait nous conduire
jusqu’à Suez. Mais avant d’y arriver on s’arrête à Aden. A cet endroit,
on prend encore du charbon; rien de plus désolé que cette terre aride
sur laquelle on ne rencontre que des habitations misérables. Les
naturels, comme des troupeaux de mendiants, nagent des heures entières
autour du steamer, guettant, se ruant les uns sur les autres pour la
moindre pièce qu’on leur jette. Ils sont d’une horrible laideur; leur
chevelure est laineuse comme celle des nègres, et de diverses couleurs.
Aden est, en somme, une fort malheureuse contrée.

Après sept jours de navigation dans la mer Rouge, nous arrivâmes à Suez;
je débarquai avec un véritable plaisir. Le parcours de l’isthme se fait
dans les diligences qui sont traînées par de mauvais chevaux, qu’on est
obligé de relayer toutes les deux lieues. Les bagages et les
marchandises suivent à dos de chameaux; les conducteurs qui font le
service du désert sont presque tous borgnes. Une quantité innombrable de
mouches voltigent sans cesse autour de ces malheureux et s’attachent
impitoyablement à leurs yeux, qu’elles semblent ronger; on dirait que
ces vilaines bêtes travaillent sur des matières pourries. Des carcasses
de chameaux, que l’on rencontre à chaque instant et qui sont laissées
sur le chemin, servent de pâture aux corbeaux. Deux hôtels restaurants
existent sur la route, ils sont ouverts par les soins de la Compagnie
pour les besoins des voyageurs; le trajet du désert se fait en seize
heures, puis on arrive au Caire.

Le Caire, la ville orientale où l’on croit rêver les yeux ouverts, où
l’on marche de surprises en surprises, comme dans les contes des _Mille
et une Nuits_. Tant de récits complets ont été écrits sur ce pays, que
je ne tenterai pas d’en faire ici une pâle description. J’y passai trois
jours et je les employai à visiter ce qu’il y a de curieux: les bazars,
où s’étalent des étoffes brodées d’or et de soie avec une richesse
merveilleuse; la citadelle qui renferme le tombeau du vice-roi d’Égypte.
Là, il me fallut ôter mes chaussures et marcher pieds nus. Quant aux
pyramides, je ne les vis que de loin, en descendant le Nil, de sorte que
leur vue n’excita pas chez moi cet enthousiasme traditionnel et, sans
doute, mérité qu’elles inspirent d’ordinaire. Je fis toutes ces
excursions escortée d’un guide qui me servait d’interprète. De toutes
les sensations que j’ai ressenties dans mes voyages, aucune n’est
comparable à celle que m’a fait éprouver la ville du Caire.

Pour se rendre à Alexandrie, on prend un petit bateau à vapeur qui
descend le Nil jusqu’à Boulac; c’est un trajet de six heures. En suivant
la rive je pus jouir à mon aise de la vue de tous ces villages égyptiens
bâtis en terre grise, avec une fourmilière de pigeonniers.

A Boulac, on prend le chemin de fer qui, en trois heures, vous conduit à
Alexandrie; j’y séjournai encore trois jours, temps nécessaire pour
l’arrivée des bagages, et les préparatifs d’embarquement pour l’Europe.
Alexandrie ne présente rien de pittoresque; ses bazars sont malpropres
et mal assortis. On n’a pas là, comme au Caire, la vue réjouie par la
variété et la richesse des costumes orientaux, car les Européens y sont
en bien plus grand nombre. J’allai visiter le palais du vice-roi, la
colonne de Pompée, l’aiguille de Cléopâtre. Que d’antiquaires eussent
été heureux à ma place! Quant à moi, pressée du désir de revoir ma
patrie, je ne songeais qu’au départ; je m’embarquai donc à bord du
steamer _le Valetta_. Je n’avais plus que six jours de mer avant de
toucher la terre natale. Le quatrième on relâcha à Malte, mais pour une
halte de quatre heures seulement: personne n’alla à terre. Deux jours
après, le 26 décembre 1854, _le Valetta_ jetait l’ancre dans la rade de
Marseille, et le 30 j’étais à Paris, où je pus lire dans le journal _la
Presse_: «Mademoiselle Fanny Loviot, qui avait été prise par des pirates
dans les mers de la Chine, vient de rentrer en France, par Marseille, à
bord du _Valetta_.»

Avec quelle joie, quel bonheur, après avoir fait le tour du monde et
couru les plus grands dangers, je me retrouvai au milieu de ma famille,
de mes amis. Partie pour chercher la fortune, je n’avais rencontré que
des périls; mais la nature m’était apparue sous ses aspects les plus
variés, et s’il m’avait fallu subir les privations, endurer la fatigue,
j’avais du moins vécu de cette vie pleine d’émotions qui n’est pas sans
charme dans la jeunesse. Je n’ai donc point à regretter d’avoir fait ce
voyage.

Puisse le lecteur indulgent ne point regretter de l’avoir lu!

Les articles qui terminent cet ouvrage relatent comme faits divers
quelques fragments de mon histoire. Ils ne méritent pas une sérieuse
attention, car ils répètent en partie le récit déjà fait par le
capitaine Rooney; mais je les ajoute comme cachet d’authenticité, ayant
paru dans les journaux français.




PIÈCES JUSTIFICATIVES

LA PRESSE, 20 _décembre_ 1854.


Le _Moniteur de la Flotte_ publie l’extrait suivant d’une lettre datée
de Hong-Kong, le 27 octobre, et qui contient des détails intéressants
sur un petit drame maritime:

«Le navire chilien _le Caldera_ partit de Hong-Kong, le 5 octobre, pour
San-Francisco, avec deux passagers, une jeune dame de Paris, Mlle
Fanny Loviot, et un Chinois. Surpris, deux jours après son départ, par
une affreuse tempête, il avait relâché dans une baie située derrière
quelques îles où le vent l’avait poussé: il comptait s’y réparer; mais,
pendant la nuit, et tandis que l’équipage était occupé aux pompes, trois
jonques chinoises l’ont assailli tout d’un coup, s’en sont emparées et
l’on mis au pillage; les brigands qui les montaient sont restés deux
jours maîtres du navire; ils l’ont quitté en voyant arriver une nouvelle
flottille de jonques.

»Le 11 octobre, les bandits qui montaient une de ces dernières jonques
offrirent au capitaine du _Caldera_ de le conduire à Hong-Kong, lui, un
Chinois du bord et une jeune dame passagère; mais quand la jeune dame et
le Chinois furent descendus dans l’embarcation, les bandits poussèrent
au large et ne voulurent jamais prendre le capitaine, qui réussit enfin,
un peu plus tard, à se procurer un bateau et à se rendre à Hong-Kong.

»Pendant ce temps, les pirates entraînèrent la jeune dame et le Chinois,
et les firent entrer dans un bateau, où ils les enfermèrent dans une
petite cabine de l’arrière. «Nous étions obligés, écrit la jeune dame
dans son récit, de nous tenir _en raccourci_ faute de place, et on nous
surveillait de très-près; le soir, il nous était permis de sortir pour
un quart d’heure à peu près de notre prison; mais dès que les pirates
voyaient venir d’autres bateaux, ils nous faisaient rentrer au plus
vite; ils nous fournissaient de la nourriture à l’heure de leurs repas,
et nous disaient souvent que si le bateau qui portait notre capitaine à
Hong-Kong ne ramenait pas notre rançon, ils nous relâcheraient.

»Nous sommes restés ainsi jusqu’au matin du 18; le Chinois, mon
compagnon d’infortune, entendit les pirates dire qu’un steamer était en
vue et qu’il fallait faire des préparatifs pour se sauver à terre; ils
ne tardèrent pas, en effet, à s’échapper, nous laissant ainsi libres, et
sans nous faire aucun mal. Pendant le temps que nous avons passé à bord
de ce bateau, les pirates ont attaqué, la nuit, un bateau chinois, et,
le lendemain, ils ont trafiqué de leur butin avec un autre bateau. De
notre prison, nous entendîmes distinctement passer les marchandises d’un
bateau à l’autre et compter l’argent.»

»Le steamer envoyé à la recherche des pirates, et qui a délivré la jeune
dame et le Chinois, a détruit, avant de quitter ces parages pour revenir
à Hong-Kong, trois villages occupés par les pirates. On croit qu’une
nouvelle expédition de bâtiments de guerre sera spontanément dirigée
contre les repaires où ces bandits se réunissent.»


PRESSE, 30 _décembre_ 1854.

«Mademoiselle Fanny Loviot, qui avait été prise par des pirates, dans
les mers de Chine, vient de rentrer en France, par Marseille, à bord du
_Valetta_.»


MONITEUR, 20 _janvier_ 1855.

«Le gouvernement de l’Empereur a reçu de Son Excellence lord Cowley
communication d’une dépêche adressée à l’amirauté par le contre-amiral
sir James Sterling, commandant en chef la station navale de Sa Majesté
britannique dans les mers de l’Inde et de la Chine, ainsi que d’un
rapport en date du 20 octobre 1854, dans lequel sir William Hoste,
capitaine du vaisseau _le Spartan_, rend compte d’une expédition
entreprise contre les pirates de l’île de Symong, aux environs de Macao.

»Les pirates avaient pillé et fait échouer la barque portugaise
_Caldera_, emmenant une dame française qui se trouvait au nombre des
passagers. Le croiseur britannique _Lady Mary Wood_ les ayant vainement
poursuivis, le vice-consul de France à Hong-Kong demanda au capitaine du
_Spartan_ d’envoyer un détachement à bord du steamer _Ann_, que les
assureurs de la barque se proposaient d’expédier pour recommencer la
même tentative.

»Le 17 octobre dernier, d’après les ordres de sir William Hoste, le
lieutenant Palisser partit avec quatre-vingt-cinq hommes montés sur
trois chaloupes; il jeta l’ancre près des débris du _Caldera_. Le
lendemain matin, ayant aperçu sous le vent quelques jonques d’une
apparence suspecte, le lieutenant leur donna la chasse avec les trois
bateaux qu’il commandait, le peu de profondeur de l’eau interdisant au
steamer d’approcher de la côte. Ces jonques se dirigèrent aussitôt vers
la terre, où leurs équipages s’empressèrent de se réfugier, après avoir
jeté leurs armes à la mer. Les Anglais eurent le bonheur de trouver dans
la première jonque la voyageuse française, ainsi qu’un négociant chinois
fait prisonnier en même temps qu’elle. Ils les envoyèrent tous deux à
bord de l’_Ann_, et incendièrent la jonque ainsi que deux autres
bâtiments; ils se dirigèrent ensuite jusqu’au village de Kou-Cheoumi,
d’où l’on avait fait feu sur les bâtiments anglais deux jours
auparavant, et où l’on savait qu’était déposée la cargaison enlevée par
les pirates. Ils retrouvèrent en effet cent cinquante-trois sacs de
sucre et quarante caisses de thé qu’ils emportèrent, et ils brûlèrent
deux villages.

»Pendant la première de ces opérations, on découvrit un troisième
village, défendu par une batterie de quatre canons et huit pièces de
siége. Le lieutenant força son chemin à travers un taillis épais, et,
après avoir essuyé une décharge qui ne lui blessa personne, il s’empara
de la batterie, en dispersa et en tua les défenseurs, incendia le
village avec les bateaux échoués sur le rivage, et s’éloigna après
avoir encloué les canons, à l’exception de six qu’il emporta comme
trophée de sa victoire.

»Dans sa dépêche, sir William Hoste signala la bravoure et la bonne
conduite des équipages, qui ont travaillé pendant douze heures, exposés
à un soleil ardent: il fait aussi le plus grand éloge du lieutenant
Palisser, qui, en quatre mois, a commandé cinq expéditions contre les
pirates avec le même succès, et a détruit trois forts pourvus de
dix-sept canons.»

                     LA PATRIE, 12 _février_ 1855.

                                                    «Macao, 6 décembre.

     »Le 6 octobre dernier, un navire chilien, _le Caldera_, parti la
     veille de San-Francisco, étant venu échouer, par suite de mauvais
     temps, près d’une des nombreuses îles situées au sud-ouest de
     Macao, fut attaqué et pillé par les pirates. Une jeune Française,
     Mlle Fanny Loviot se trouvait à bord; les pirates la retinrent
     prisonnière ainsi qu’un autre passager, riche marchand chinois, et
     laissèrent partir le capitaine du bâtiment pour Hong-Kong, dans
     l’intention d’en obtenir une double rançon.

     »Instruit de ces faits par le capitaine du _Caldera_, le
     vice-consul français s’adressa au commandant de la station
     anglaise, sir William Hoste, et le pria, en l’absence de toutes
     forces françaises dans ces parages, d’envoyer un bâtiment à la
     recherche de Mlle Loviot. Sir William Hoste accéda avec
     empressement à cette demande et fit aussitôt partir quatre-vingts
     hommes de la corvette _le Spartan_, sous les ordres du second de ce
     bâtiment, le lieutenant de vaisseau Palisser, à bord du steamer
     _the Lady Mary-Wood_, que les consignataires du _Caldera_ avaient
     affrété dans le but de sauver la partie du chargement qui n’aurait
     pas encore été enlevée par les pirates.

     »Le détachement des marins anglais rencontra les pirates, incendia
     un grand village où ils s’étaient retranchés, leur tua vingt hommes
     et leur prit quelques canons. Il surprit la jonque sur laquelle se
     trouvaient la captive ainsi que le négociant chinois, sévit
     énergiquement contre les bateaux et les villages qui servaient
     d’abri aux pirates, et revint à Hong-Kong dans la matinée du 19. La
     jeune femme était restée douze jours prisonnière de ces misérables;
     mais l’espoir qu’ils avaient d’obtenir pour elle une riche rançon
     les avait empêchés de la maltraiter.»


                                  FIN




                                 TABLE


CHAPITRE PREMIER

Départ du Havre.--Regrets de la vie parisienne.--Un banc de
rochers.--Rio-Janeiro.--Le bétail humain.--Départ de Rio.--Six semaines
en mer.--Le cap Horn.--Tempêtes.--Mort d’un matelot.--Pêche d’un
requin.--Terre! terre!--Le pays de l’or                                3


CHAPITRE II

La baie de San-Francisco.--Navires abandonnés.--La Mission
Dolorès.--Mœurs des Chinois émigrés.--La race noire.--Les habitués
de Jackson-street.--Maison des jeux.--La bande noire.--Comité de
vigilance.--La pendaison                                              21

CHAPITRE III

Sacramento.--Le fort Sutter.--Indiens
nomades.--Mary’s-ville.--Shasta-City.--Rencontre d’un
ours.--Weaverville.--Les mineurs.--Les montagnes
Rocheuses.--Yreka.--Retour à San-Francisco                            37


CHAPITRE IV

Incendie.--Départ pour la Chine.--_L’Arturo._--Une malade à
bord.--Les sorciers chinois.--Mort.--Les mers de la Chine.--Une
voie d’eau.--Arrivée à Hong-Kong.--Visite au consul.--Voyage à
Canton.--Insurrection chinoise                                        61


CHAPITRE V

Le capitaine Rooney.--Than-Sing.--Le typhon.--Chute du mât de
misaine.--Effets de la tempête.--Désastres du _Caldera_.--Les
pirates chinois.--Scènes dans l’entre-ponts.--Équipage
enchaîné.--Interrogatoire.--Menaces de mort.--Pillage                 83


CHAPITRE VI

Séquestration.--Le bon Chinois.--Une lueur d’espoir.--Nouvelle
flottille de jonques.--Déguisement.--Plus de vivres.--Pirate père
de famille.--Proposition de fuite.--Refus de l’équipage.--Fureur du
capitaine Rooney.--Embarcation à la mer.--Désappointement            109

CHAPITRE VII

Désespoir.--J’écris la date de ma captivité.--Apparence de
bonté des pirates.--Un joyeux repas.--Un steamer en vue.--Fuite
des pirates vers la montagne.--Coups de canon sur notre
jonque.--Reconnaissances.--Hourra! hourra!--Je suis sauvée           167


CHAPITRE VIII

Récit du capitaine Rooney.--Expédition sur la côte.--Villages
incendiés.--La mère des pirates.--Mort d’un Chinois.--_The lady
Mary Wood._--Retour à Hong-Kong.--Protection du consul.--Visite de
Than-Sing.--Adieux du capitaine Rooney                               193


CHAPITRE IX

Départ de Chine.--_Le Malta._--Singapore.--Penang.--L’île de
Ceylan.--_Le Bentinck._--Aden.--Dans la mer Rouge.--Isthme de
Suez.--Le Caire.--Le Nil.--Les pyramides.--Boulac.--Alexandrie.--_Le
Valetta._--Malte.--Marseille.--J’ai fait le tour du monde            218


FIN DE LA TABLE





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LES PIRATES CHINOIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


